# Sensing
The sensing module of the system is needed to make the device fun and interactive. The module has the following requirements, which were taken from the [programme of requirements](03.HW_S_Overview.md):
1. The device must include a contactless sensing method for sensing the hand of the user during interaction.
2. Basic circuit design, with commonly available electrical components, shall be used to create the internal
hardware.
3. The housing of the device shall enable intuitive interaction from the user.
4. The system must be able to communicate with the selected microcontroller.

## Design exploration
To start designing the sensing module, multiple sensing methods were evaluated to find the most suitable approach to sensing the player's hand. The main requirement was to reliably detect the players hand without making physical contact with the device, all while remaining intuitive for the player to use.
The following methods were evaluated:
1. Ultrasonic sensing
2. Lidar sensing
3. Capacitive sensing

### Ultrasonic sensing
An ultrasonic sensor uses high frequency sound waves and measures the time of flight of the reflected signal.
$$ d = \frac{v_{sound} t_{flight}}{2} $$ (tof-distance)
As shown in formula above, using the speed of sound it converts this time to distance. This is a pretty reliable method for sensing moderate distances. 

However there are some drawbacks with ultrasonic sensing.

One of the drawbacks is the interference from other sensors. If multiple sound sculptures were played in the same room, the sensors could detect sound waves from other sensors giving a very inaccurate measurement.

Adding to that is the fact that the accuracy of ultrasonic sensors is very much limited at close range. Since the sound sculpture needs to be interactive, the distance between the hand and the player is usually in this closer region (less then $50cm$).

That is why ultrasonic sensing was not used in the design.

### Lidar sensing

Lidar (Light Detection And Ranging) is another method to remotely measure distance, and, like ultrasonic, also another method that uses time of flight in its measurement. The main difference is that Lidar uses a beam of light instead of a sound wave.

Lidar has a very good range, typically around 40 meters, likewise it has a good accuracy as well, hence why it is used in many applications.

However Lidar sensors are quite expensive due to their internal complexity. Another flaw is that most Lidar sensors are optimized for a longer range, and not for close range measurements like in our application. That is why the choice was made to not use Lidar sensing.

### Capacitive sensing

Capacitive sensing is the final and most unique method that was evaluated. It relies on a capacitor being created between an antenna and an external conductive object, the players hand in our case. 

Capacitive sensing is very suitable for close range applications, since a small distance results in a  larger capacitance and thus a better sensitivity when played. This method is also very cheap since any conductive material can be used as an antenna.

Another big advantage is that due to capacitor being formed between the player and the antenna, the angular position of the hand does not matter, only the absolute distance. This creates a 3D environment for the player to play in. According to an [interview](B.AppendixB.md) with a pedagogue and teacher this was also seen as a big advantage in creating more interaction, by creating a 'magical' feeling around the sculpture.

The downside however is that the antenna also forms a capacitor with the rest of the environment, not only the players hand. This would lead to inconsistency in the frequency of the oscillator. A possible solution to this problem is to add a form of calibration, this would however come with the cost of increasing the complexity.

In the end capacitive sensing was chosen as the approach for the sensing module.


## Operating principle

### Capacitive sensing principle
Capacitive sensing is the way the original theremin used to sense the player's hand position [@glinsky2000theremin]. This was done by making use of an oscillator. This oscillator consisted of inductive and capacitive elements. By placing an antenna in parallel with the other capacitive elements, it would create one plate of a capacitor. The idea behind this method is that the other plate is formed by the player's hand. This principle relies on the fact that the human body is for a large part made up of salt water, which is a conductor.  Since the resistance of the rest of the human body is so large, the plate formed by the human hand is effectively grounded, making the player part of the circuit. 
The general formula for capacitance between two conducting plates is given by:

$$    C = \frac{\epsilon A}{d} $$ (cap-form)

Where $A$ is the overlapping area of the two "plates", $\epsilon$ the permittivity and $d$ the distance. Formula [](cap-form) shows the general formula for capacitance, but this is quite a simplified version of what is actually happening. But its main purpose is to show the connection between distance, area and capacitance. In this particular case, there are two things that affect the capacitance: the area and the distance. From an increase in overlapping area follows an increase in capacitance. And the closer the two plates are to each other, the greater the capacitance.  

### Oscillator principle
The circuit below shows a simple LC circuit that demonstrates the workings of an oscillator. It is made up of a capacitor, an inductor and a voltage source which is turned on after $t = 0$.

:::{figure} figures/sensing/lc-circuit1-schem
:name: schem1
Schematic of an LC circuit with total capacitance of 10nF
:::

This circuit results in an oscillating signal due to the capacitor and the inductor constantly charging and discharging. 

The frequency of the waveform is dependant on the total capacitance and inductance. This resonant frequency is given by the formula:
$$ 
f_0 = \frac{1}{2 \pi \sqrt{LC}}
$$ 

This works out to be: $f = \frac{1}{2 \pi \sqrt{1 \cdot 10^{-8}}} = \space 1.592 kHz$. So we expect to see a frequency of around $1.6kHz$ in this circuit.

### Effect of the hand
Now if an antenna would be connected to the capacitor, it would act as an extra capacitor added in parallel. This example assumes a capacitance of 10 nF between the player and the antenna. This is illustrated in the figure below.
:::{figure} figures/sensing/lc-circuit2-schem
:name: lc-circ-2
The same LC-circuit but with a capacitor added in parallel, resembling the antenna.
:::
The extra capacitor added increases the total capacitance of the circuit to $20 nF$. Using the same formula as before, the frequency of oscillation should decrease: $f = \frac{1}{2 \pi \sqrt{2 \cdot 10^{-8}}} = \space 1.125 kHz.$

This principle is applied and used together with an antenna to create a signal that is dependant on the player's hand position.

### Simulations
To give better illustration on workings of LC oscillators, the circuits were simulated in [LTSpice](https://www.analog.com/en/resources/design-tools-and-calculators/ltspice-simulator.html?ADICID=PDSR_Global_LTspice-NB_Google_PSC_202508&gad_source=1&gad_campaignid=22826770531&gbraid=0AAAAACxqTx9fcTi4hljlEvjwJUqUo29fq&gclid=CjwKCAjw6MPRBhBTEiwAd-7MrwCTFRqDBy7jpBIagTQKmSXBhKErXmlkdGIGouxYCcNOYFtkOGUJiBoCWFcQAvD_BwE).

#### Circuit without antenna
In the first circuit, the voltage across the capacitor (Vc) shows to be a smooth sinusoidal waveform when simulated, as illustrated in figure [](waveform1).

:::{figure} figures/sensing/lc-circuit1
:name: waveform1
The oscillating voltage across the capacitor
:::

When observing the Fast Fourier Transform ([FFT](fft1)) of the signal one can observe that the signal oscillates at approximately $1.6kHz$
:::{figure} figures/sensing/lc1-fft
:name: fft1
The FFT of the capacitor voltage shows a peak at f = 1.6kHz 
:::

#### Circuit with antenna
In the second circuit the frequency of output voltage is expected to drop to $1.1kHz$ due to the increase in capacitance. 
The waveform, shown in [](lc-2-waveform) is observed to still be sinusoidal as expected.

:::{figure} figures/sensing/lc-circuit2
:name: lc-2-waveform
Schematic of an LC circuit with total capacitance of 20nF
:::

And the FFT shows that indeed the signal's frequency is shifted to $1.1kHz$
:::{figure} figures/sensing/lc2-fft
:name: fft2
The FFT of the circuit with the antenna connected. The peak is now at f = 1.1kHz
:::

So as calculated before, an increase in capacitance leads to a lower frequency of oscillation.


## Design description

### System overview
The sensing module is responsible for converting the players hand position into an electrical signal that can be processed by the rest of the system. A variation of capacitive sensing is used to achieve this, where the players hand influences the capacitance of an oscillating circuit through an antenna. 

The module is divided into three submodules: sensing, frequency generation and signal conditioning. The systems subdivision is shown in figure [](sys-overview) below

:::{figure} figures/sensing/p2
:name: sys-overview
Overview of the submodules
:::

The sensing detects the players hand, which gets translated to a frequency by the frequency generation module and that signal gets converted to a usable signal for the next module. 

The output of the whole module is a signal that has a frequency which is dependant on the players hand position.

### Sensor design
For the sensor itself, a simple conductive, hollow metal rod is used as an antenna.

### Oscillator design choice
To convert the capacitance created by the antenna, a resonant circuit is implemented. As discussed in a previous [section](#capacitive-sensing-principle), changes in capacitance in an LC circuit affect the resonant frequency. By analyzing this frequency the player's hand position can be determined indirectly.

A Colpitts oscillator topology was selected for the frequency generation submodule. This is a widely used type of LC oscillator with relatively cheap components and a stable output, even at higher frequencies.

Another advantage of this is oscillator is that the antenna can be connected easily to the Colpitts oscillator. Since the antenna is virtually grounded through the body of the player, ensuring the LC bank is grounded as well would significantly simplify the circuit. This is the case in the chosen Colpitts oscillator configuration. 

The Colpitts oscillator is therefore ideal as a frequency generating module.

### Signal conditioning
The signal generated by the oscillator is a low amplitude sine wave with a DC offset. While this signal has the right frequency, it is not able to be used in communication in its current state. Therefore a signal conditioning submodule is added to produce a waveform that is suitable for the signal processing module.

The original design used a comparator to convert the low amplitude sine wave to a high amplitude block wave with the same frequency. A dedicated comparator module would be able to keep up with the high frequency of the oscillator and provide a cleaner signal to the signal processing module, resulting in clearer readout.

However due to component availability constraints an alternative solution had to be found. First an operational-amplifier comparator was implemented but after the initial tests it was clear that the op-amp was not able to keep up with the high frequency of the signal. 

An alternative solution was found by using a transistor-based amplifier. This circuit amplifies the output of the oscillator and inverts the signal. This is made possible by using an appropriate biasing network to operate at the correct point. Although this approach is not as good as a dedicated comparator, it produces a signal that retains it frequency and has an amplitude high enough to be read by the signal processing module.


### Design summary
The three submodules combined make up the sensing module and convert hand position into a readable, frequency modulated electrical signal.


## Design implementation

### Antenna implementation
For the antenna a simple metal rod was used. This metal rod was hollow with a total width of $20mm$ and an inner width off $16mm$. The length of the antenna was $37 cm$. The length has a minimal impact on the capacitance but it was found that a long antenna is more blocking than contributing, so it was decided to keep it short. 
:::{figure} figures/sensing/antenna
---
name: antenna
---
The antenna used by the module
:::
### Oscillator implementation
As described in the section on [oscillator design choice](#oscillator-design-choice), a Colpitts oscillator was implemented as the dedicated frequency generation module. The Colpitts oscillator was built in the common-collector configuration as shown in the figure below, and implemented using a prototyping board.
:::{figure} figures/sensing/p1
---
name: oscillator
---
The colpitts oscillator in common collector configuration, inspired by [@reddit_colpitts_2021]
:::

The main resonant tank of the oscillator consists of capacitors $C_2$ and $C_3$ and the inductor $L_1$. The antenna is connected to the tank and contributes to the total capacitance as well. The oscillator requires a $5V$ power supply, which is connected to the collector of an NPN transistor.

Using the same formula as before we can approximate the resonant frequency. While this is not very accurate in this case, due to many more components being present, it gives a general idea of what to expect for the frequency and how to tune it. 
$$ 
f_0 ≈ \frac{1}{2 \pi \sqrt{LC_{eq}}} ≈ 990 kHz
$$ 
Where $C_{eq}$ represents the equivalent capacitance of $C_2$ and $C_3$, combined with the capacitance of the antenna.

This means the oscillator is in the lower frequency range, but not too low either. The components were chosen this way to ensure that the frequency would not be too high to measure or generate, and not too low such that the capacitance of the hand would not have a noticeable impact on the frequency.

After the circuit was built, the antenna could simply be connected to the rest of the oscillator bank to complete the frequency generator of the module.

### Signal conditioning implementation
The signal conditioning submodule was originally meant to utilize a high speed comparator, but this was not possible due to component availability. The op-amp comparator was also implemented but this turned out to be incompatible with the frequency of the oscillator.

So the final implementation was a NPN transistor-based amplifier. This was built in the common-emitter configuration using a capacitor for coupling and a resistor for biasing the DC operating point. It requires a $3.3V$ input and outputs a signal between $0V$ and $3.3V$ The circuit is shown below.

:::{figure} figures/sensing/bjt-amp
---
name: bjt-amplifier
---
The NPN transistor-based amplifier used for signal conditioning
:::

The amplifier was able to successfully retain the frequency of the original signal, but with inverted amplitude. It did not convert the signal to a full digital (square wave) signal but the amplification was sufficient for reading out the signal.

### Full submodule implementation
To complete the module the oscillator and the signal conditioning module were built on a prototyping board and the antenna was connected via a wire. The full system setup is shown in the figure below.

:::{figure} figures/sensing/schem-full-circuit
---
name: circuit-setup-lt
---
Schematic of all submodules combined.
:::
:::{figure} figures/sensing/circuit-setup
---
name: circuit-setup
---
Setup of all the submodules combined. The antenna is connected via the node labeled 'C'.
:::

### Testing
The sensing module and all of its submodule were tested in multiple ways to verify that they worked according to expectations and fulfilled the [requirements](03.HW_S_Overview.md)
The following tests were done in order.

1. Simulations

Simulations of all circuits were done in LTSpice to give a first indication of how the circuit would behave and what to expect as output. 

2. Static capacitance measurement

The capacitance between the players hand and the antenna was measured using an RLC meter. This gave indication of the change in capacitance which lead to tweaking some component values. The capacitance was measured at very close range ($< 1cm$)and with no hand present to show the full range of the antenna.

3. Static frequency measurement

Once the oscillator was built it was tested by connecting it to an oscilloscope and seeing if the waveform and frequency matched the expected. This was done together with the signal conditioning module to get an overview of how the whole system interacted.

4. Dynamic frequency measurement with submodule

The final test was done using the antenna to change the frequency of the signal and by using the signal processing module to readout the frequency to ensure the two module could work together in the full system.



## Results
The results are separated and shown below, grouped by their appropriate testing method.

### Simulation results

The simulations showed that the oscillator was indeed oscillating, and also showed that circuit needed some time to start to oscillation. This is demonstrated in the figure below. 

:::{figure} figures/sensing/osc-startup
---
name: osc-startup
---
Simulation results of the oscillator, showing it needing time to start oscillating at noticeable levels
:::
It shows that the circuit needs about $1ms$ to start oscillating.


To check the frequency of oscillation an FFT was applied. This simulation shows the difference with and without the antenna attached. A capacitance of $10pF$ was chosen to simulate a hand close to the antenna. 
:::{figure} figures/sensing/fft-oscillator
---
name: osc-startup-fft
---
FFT of the oscillator with and without the antenna attached.
:::

We observe that with the antenna connected the frequency drops to around $910kHz$, while initially being around $980kHz$.


And finally the signal conditioning module was simulated to ensure readability for the ESP32 microcontroller. This simulation shows the difference between the signal before conditioning and how the signal is able to be detected by the microcontroller after the signal conditioning is applied.
:::{figure} figures/sensing/amplifier-stage
---
name: bjt-amp-esp
---
The effect of the transistor-based amplifier shown in simulation.
:::

### Static capacitance results
The static capacitance measurement showed the following when the chosen antenna was connected to an RLC meter:
- Capacitance at $1cm$: 13 pF
- Capacitance with no hand present: 3 pF

### Static oscillator results
To test the actual oscillator it was connected to an oscilloscope. The figure below shows the waveform from the oscilloscope together with the measured frequency of $f = 956kHz$.

:::{figure} figures/sensing/oscilloscope-data
---
name: osc-phys
---
The physical oscillator oscillating at a frequency of 956 kHz. 
:::


### Dynamic frequency results
The dynamic frequency is the final product of this module, so it was tested together with the readout method from the signal processing module to get consistent results. The antenna was connected to the circuit and the output of the circuit was connected to the signal processing module, which is where the frequency was read out.

The following measurements were done at the following hand positions.
| Hand Distance (cm) | Frequency read out (kHz) |
|----------|----------|
| 1        | 385        |
| 5        | 520        |
| 10        | 560        |
| 15        | 600        |
| 20        | 605        |




## Discussion
The results show that the sensing module is able to successfully convert a players hand position to a frequency modulated signal. In both simulations and real tests a consistent relation between capacitance changes and output frequency was found.

However a notable deviation between physical tests and simulations is found concerning the frequency range. The theoretical design was simulated to have a frequency of $920 kHz$ at close range while in reality we measure $385 kHz$, which is a significant margin. This is most likely do to a couple of factors:
- Parasitic capacitances decrease the frequency of oscillation
- The antenna causes extra disturbance, either with internal capacitance or capacitance formed with the rest of its environment
- The waveform of the oscillator is not entirely sinusoidal, potentially causing readout errors
- The tolerance of the components could shift the resonance frequency.

Despite this unexpected shift the function behavior of the system stays the same: the closer the hand, the lower the frequency. While it is not suitable for direct translation to hand position, its most important requirement of translating changes in hand position to changes in frequency is met.

The capacitive measurements show that the antenna indeed creates a grounded capacitor between the hand and itself, but has some standard parasitic capacitance from things like the rest of the body or other things in its environment.

The signal conditioning successfully retains the frequency of the signal while amplifying and biasing the signal in the desired way.

Overall the results show a clear difference between the theoretical design and physical implementation.


## Conclusion

The system is successfully able to convert the position of a hand into measurable changes in frequency of an electrical signal. Enabling contactless and intuitive interaction between the user and the sound sculpture. Although the frequency range was not what was initially expected, the systems still serves its main purpose.

This deviation can be explained by looking at how implementation in the real-world differs from a simulation, with things like parasitic capacitance or non-ideal components. 

Despite this deviation, the sensing module has met its requirements of making a system that, without contact, senses the change of position of a hand and outputs the result in a readable way, all while remaining intuitive to use.

To conclude, a Colpitts oscillator based sensing method is a viable module to use for the system, even under significant deviations from the theoretical module.





 







