---
kernelspec:
  name: python3
  display_name: Python 3
  language: python
thebe: true
---
# Visualisation

For the educational and interactive requirement given by the client, a method of giving real-time visual feedback of the sound heard, should be provided. This visualisation had to be both real-time and understandable. For educational value, [a pedagogue, who is also a teacher](app-interview) is consulted regarding which visualisations are worth adding. In their opinion, different visualisation could add value, as long as no extra understanding is needed or that understanding is handled in the NLT module. In the [program of requirement](sec-por) the following requirements regard the visualisation of the sound sculpture:

* The device shall provide visual representations of the waveforms.
* The latency of the hardware shall not exceed 50 ms.

## Design Description

The PyQT library has been chosen to be used for the real-time plotting. This has been chosen due to its ability to show real-time plots and the ease of creating a graphic user interface (GUI) with it, which makes testing more efficient. Other libraries considered where libraries like matplotlib and plotly. However, matplotlib is not suitable for efficient real time updates and plotly does not have the possibility to make a GUI with it. The GUI is needed for possible further development of using a built-in touchscreen display and for easier testing.

The signal processing group of the project handles the waveform generation, which is given in the form of chunks of 2048 samples with a sample frequency of 48 kHz. This results in a resolution of:

$$
\label{freq_resolution}
\Delta f = \frac{f_s}{N} = \frac{48000}{2048} = 23.4 Hz
$$

This resolution results in a latency of:

$$
\label{delay_chunksize}
T = \frac{1}{\Delta f} = \frac{N}{f_s}= 42,67 ms
$$

This is within the [requirements](@sec-por) set.

Four different ways of visualising the sound are being used.

The first is the waveform, represented in a time-versus-amplitude graph. This is used to show the waveform, which can be compared to the sound heard by the students.

The second visualisation is the frequency domain representation of the wave. The frequency-domain representation is obtained using the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) algorithm implemented in the SciPy library. The FFT efficiently computes the discrete-time fourier transform, defined as:

$$
y[k] = \sum_{n=0}^{N-1} e^{-2\pi j \frac{kn}{N}} x[n]
$$

However, the fft function alone will come with some spectral leakage, to minimize this a Hann window was applied prior to the fft computation. The Hann window was used because it is one of the most commonly used windows for general spectral analysis because of its good side-lobe suppression and frequency resolution. [@10.1109/PROC.1978.10837]

To improve the bin spacing of the FFT, which is currently [23.4 Hz](freq_resolution), quadratic interpolation can be used. This is a method of fitting a parabola throught the peak and it neighbour bins. This results in a more accurate frequency estimation than the [23.4 Hz](freq_resolution). [@10.3390/app6100306]

For this visualisation, a logarithmic frequency axis has been chosen. This has several reasons; first of all, musical notes are logarithmically divided so a logarithmic representation makes more sense. Secondly, a large range of the frequency axis is needed to show all the harmonics, especially for blockwaves and sawtooth waves. 

For these two visualisation, automatic scaling of the vertical axes is used to ensure that signals of varying amplitudes remain visible without requiring manual adjustment:

```python
    if np.max(np.abs(chunk)) > p1_ymax:                             
        p1_ymax = p1_ymax * 1.5
        p1.setYRange(-p1_ymax, p1_ymax)
    if np.max(fft_values) > p2_ymax:
        p2_ymax = p2_ymax * 1.5
        p2.setYRange(0, p2_ymax)
    if np.max(fft_values) > p3_fft_ymax:
        p3_fft_ymax = p3_fft_ymax * 1.5
        p3_fft.setYRange(0, p3_fft_ymax)
```

The third visualisation used is the waterfall spectrogram. This spectrogram is created using the `scipy.signal` spectrogram function. However, this function is only able to create a waterfall plot of a complete signal. Therefore, a spectrogram is calculated for each incoming audio chunk. The resulting spectral data are appended to a rolling buffer, producing a continuously updating waterfall display. This visualisation in combined with the fft in the same window. 

The last visualisation created is the note visualisation. This visualisation shows the notes that are being played by the sound sculpture. For this, the frequency is transformed into MIDI notation via the following formula:

$$
n = 69 + 12 \log_2\!\left(\frac{f}{440}\right)
$$
the frequency that is used in this formula is determined by locating the frequency bin with the largest magnitude in the FFT spectrum.

The result of this formula is a number. To convert it to a note, we take the modulus of 12 of this number and use it as an index in an array of note labels. For the octave we divide the number by 12, subtract 1 and round it down to an integer:

```python
note_labels = ['C', 'C#', 'D', 'D#', 'E', 'F', 'F#', 'G', 'G#', 'A', 'A#', 'B']
note = note_labels[n % 12]
octave = n // 12 -1
```

To visualise these notes in a way to a way that students without a musical background feel more familiar with has been done by representing the notes by visualising a piano and showing which key closed to the sound heard by turning it red. To make this piano, simple white rectangles are drawn based on the minimal and the maximal midi value. The values chosen are:

```python
midi_min = 21 
midi_max = 108
```

These values are chosen according to the minimal and maximal midi values of a full piano. 


## Evaluation and Testing Method
For validation of the visualisation software, several prerecorded WAV files were used as test signals. At the time of development, the signal-generation subsystem and UART communication interface were still under active development by the other project subgroup. Therefore, audio files containing known waveforms were used as reproducible test inputs. 

Multiple waveforms have been tested and the resulting visualisation had been compared to the theoretical outputs. Also, a wavefile with alternating frequencies and amplitudes has been tested to make sure alternating frequencies would not be an issue for the code.

:::{figure} figures/0.5.Visualisation/Square_Wave.png
---
name: Squarewave-visualisation
---
waveform and fft visualisation of a squarewave of 500 Hz
:::

As expected, a square wave of 500 Hz is visualised in the [top visualisation](#name-squarewave-visualisation). In the [bottom](#name-squarewave-visualisation) we see a spike in magnitude at a frequency of 500 Hz and smaller spikes at the odd harmonics of the wave (1500 Hz, 2500 Hz etc.).

:::{figure} figures/0.5.Visualisation/two_sines.png
---
name: Two sine waves visualisation
---
waveform and fft visualisation of two sine waves with frequencies 500 Hz and 2200 Hz
:::

As expected, a combination of two sines is shown in the [top visualisation](#name-two-sine-waves-visualisation). In the [bottom](#name-two-sine-waves-visualisation) we see to spikes at the frequencies at 500 Hz and 2200 Hz as expected.

In the final version of the sound sculpture the wave selection is done by a potmeter, which outputted by the signal processing groups as either a 0, 1 or 2. However, for testing a selector in the graphical user interface has been used to select the different visuals. During the integration, the first sample in the chunk of 2048 was decided to be dedicated to represent the window selection. 

The latency requirement has also been tested. This has been done in the following way

```python
import time as tm

...

def update()
start = tm.perf_counter()
...
#update code
...
end = tm.perf_counter()
processing_time = (end-start)*1000
p1.setTitle(f'Delay: {processing_time:.2f}ms')
```
This results in a representation of the duration of the delay of the code. The average of this is about 20 ms, this added to the delay of [42,67 ms](delay_chunksize) and the delay in updates of 5 ms add together to a delay of 67,67 ms. 

## Conclusion

In the [program of requirements](sec-por), there are two requirements that are about the visualisation part of the project. 
* The device shall provide visual representations of the waveforms.
* The latency of the hardware shall not exceed 50 ms

This first requirement is met; several ways of visualisation, that add educational value to the @NLT module are created and implemented with the rest of the sub-groups.
The second requirement, unfortunately, has not been met because the delay of 67,67ms exceeds the requirement of 50 ms. The easiest way of decrease the delay is by decreasing the chunk size as can be seen in [(2)](freq_resolution). However, this will reduce the frequency resolution which smears the frequencies more. A design trade off is made in favour of the frequency response, because is more important for educational value. In future works, the visualisation code could be optimized to run more efficiently, to reduce latency. Other future works could include: in-built touchscreen display with GUI and user tests to determine whether these visualisations are the best. 

<details open>
<summary>Final code </summary>

```python
#import pyqtgraph.examples
import ctypes
#ctypes.windll.ole32.OleInitialize(None)

from scipy.io import wavfile
import numpy as np
import pyqtgraph as pg
import sys
# import sounddevice as sd
import threading
from scipy.fft import fft, fftfreq
from scipy.signal import spectrogram
# import soundfile as sf
import socket
from pyqtgraph.Qt import QtCore, QtWidgets, QtGui
import time as tm


sock = socket.socket(socket.AF_INET, socket.SOCK_DGRAM)                         #UART connection
sock.bind(("127.0.0.1", 8080))
sock.setblocking(False)

sample_rate = 48000

app = QtWidgets.QApplication(sys.argv)                                          #start the application                       

chunk_size = 2048                                           
time = np.arange(chunk_size) / sample_rate                                      #time array for one chunk, used for plotting the waveform
chunk = np.zeros(chunk_size)                                                    #audio data chunk
current_chunk = chunk.copy()                                                    #copy of the current chunk, used as a register

hann_window = np.hanning(chunk_size)                                            #hann window for the spectrogram, to reduce spectral leakage
windowed_chunk = chunk * hann_window                                            #apply the window to the chunk before performing the FFT

fft_values = np.abs(np.array(fft(windowed_chunk)))[:chunk_size//2]              #FFT values for the chunk // 2 to only take positive frequencies
fft_freqs = fftfreq(chunk_size, 1/sample_rate)[:chunk_size//2]                  #frequency corresponding to fft_values

win = QtWidgets.QWidget()                                                       #window setup
win.setWindowTitle('Audio Visualization')
layout = QtWidgets.QVBoxLayout()
win.setLayout(layout)

selector = QtWidgets.QComboBox()                                                #create dropdown selector
selector.addItems(['All', 'Waveform plot', 'FFT', 'Frequency plot','Piano'])
layout.addWidget(selector)
last_selector = 0

p1_ymax = 0.1                                                                   #initial y-axis max's, will be adjucted in update()
p2_ymax = 0.1 
p3_fft_ymax = 0.1  

f_test, t_test, Sxx_test = spectrogram(chunk, fs=sample_rate, nperseg=512, noverlap=256)   #only f-test is used, nperseg is window size, noverlap is amount op points that overlap between windows
n_freqs = len(f_test)                                                           # 512 / 2 + 1 = 257, single sided, including the zero
waterfall_buffer = np.zeros((n_freqs, 200)) - 80                                 # Making a bbuffer for the waterfall spectrogram, -80 to make the first few frames dark
log_freqs = np.logspace(np.log10(20), np.log10(sample_rate//2), n_freqs)        #log frequencies from 20 untill nyquist frequency

freq_labels = [20, 50, 100, 200, 500, 1000, 2000, 5000, 10000, 20000]           # frequencie labels.
tick_positions = [(np.log10(f), f'{f} Hz') for f in freq_labels]                #afstand van fft_freqs tot de frequenties
tick_positions_log = [(int(np.argmin(np.abs(log_freqs - f))), f'{f}') for f in freq_labels]  #afstand van fft_freqs tot de frequenties

note_labels = ['C', 'C#', 'D', 'D#', 'E', 'F', 'F#', 'G', 'G#', 'A', 'A#', 'B'] #Note labels, for some reason it starts with C
midi_min = 21                                                                   #Minimal MIDI value of a piano
midi_max = 108                                                                  #Maximal MIDI value of a piano
midi_freqs = 440 * 2 ** ((np.arange(midi_min, midi_max + 1) - 69) / 12)         #freq die bij elke midi toon hoort

amplitude_threshold = 5                                                         #threshold to suppress noise

p1 = pg.PlotWidget(title= 'Waveform plot')                                               #plot waveform
p1.setLabel('bottom', 'Time', units='s')
p1.setLabel('left', 'Amplitude')
graph1 = p1.plot(time.flatten(), chunk.astype(float).flatten())                 #flatten to use with pyqtgraph
p1.setXRange(0,time[-1])
p1.enableAutoRange(axis='x', enable=False)
layout.addWidget(p1)

p2 = pg.PlotWidget(title= 'FFT')                                                #plot FFT     
p2.setLabel('bottom', 'Frequency', units='Hz')
p2.setLabel('left', 'Magnitude')
graph2 = p2.plot(fft_freqs.flatten(), fft_values.flatten())
p2.setXRange(20, sample_rate//2)                                                #limit x-axis to Nyquist frequency
p2.setLogMode(x=True, y=False)                                                  #set logarithmic x-axis
tick_positions = [(np.log10(f), f'{f} Hz') for f in freq_labels]                #distance from fft_freqs to frequencies
p2.hide()
layout.addWidget(p2)

p3_packet = QtWidgets.QWidget()                                                 #create a packet for the plotting
p3_layout = QtWidgets.QVBoxLayout()                                             #layout voor plots onder elkaar
p3_packet.setLayout(p3_layout)                                                  #put the layout in the packet

p3_fft = pg.PlotWidget(title= 'Frequency plot')                                            #plot FFT of the packet
p3_fft.setLabel('left', 'Magnitude')
p3_fft.getAxis('left').setWidth(60)                                             #a constant width for y axis to ensure both y axis are on the same place
graph3_fft = p3_fft.plot(fft_freqs.flatten(), fft_values.flatten())             #flatten to use with pyqtgraph
p3_fft.getAxis('bottom').setStyle(showValues=False)                             #hide x-axis labels for the fft plot in the packet becasue they are shown in the spectrogram
p3_fft.setYRange(0, p3_fft_ymax)                                                #initial y-axis range
p3_layout.addWidget(p3_fft)

p3 = pg.PlotWidget()                                                            #plot spectrogram
p3.setLabel('left', 'Time (frames)')
p3.setLabel('bottom', 'Frequency', units='Hz')
p3.getAxis('left').setWidth(60)
graph3 = pg.ImageItem()
p3.addItem(graph3)
graph3.setColorMap('inferno')                                                   #colormap for the spectrogram, other option is viridis

p3.getAxis('bottom').setTicks([tick_positions_log])                             #set log frequency labels on the x-axis
p3_layout.addWidget(p3)
layout.addWidget(p3_packet)

p3_fft.setXLink(p3)                                                             #link the axis together
p3_packet.hide()

p4 = pg.PlotWidget(title= 'Notes')                                              #plot note
p4.setAspectLocked(False)
p4.setYRange(0, 1)
p4.setXRange(0, 88)
p4.getAxis('bottom').setStyle(showValues=False)
p4.getAxis('left').setStyle(showValues=False)
p4.hide()

white_keys = []
black_keys = []
white_key_items = {}
black_key_items = {}

white_pattern = [0,2,4,5,7,9,11]                                    # to connect midi notes to the right color key
black_pattern = [1,3,6,8,10]

white_x = 0
white_positions = {}
for midi in range(midi_min, midi_max + 1):                          #loop through midi notes and assign positions for white keys
    note = midi % 12
    if note in white_pattern:
        white_positions[midi] = white_x
        white_x += 1                            

for midi, x in white_positions.items():                             #create rectangles for white keys based
    rect = QtWidgets.QGraphicsRectItem(x, 0, 1, 1)
    rect.setBrush(pg.mkBrush('w')  )
    rect.setPen(pg.mkPen('k'))
    p4.addItem(rect)
    white_key_items[midi] = rect

for midi in range(midi_min, midi_max + 1):                          #loop through midi notes and create rectangles for black keys, offset calculated based on preious white key
    note = midi % 12
    if note in black_pattern:
        prev_white_x = midi - 1
        if prev_white_x in white_positions:
            x = white_positions[prev_white_x] + 0.6
            rect = QtWidgets.QGraphicsRectItem(x, 0.4, 0.6, 0.6)    #offset of black key
            rect.setBrush(pg.mkBrush('k')  )
            rect.setPen(pg.mkPen('k'))
            p4.addItem(rect)
            black_key_items[midi] = rect
p4.setXRange(0, white_x)
layout.addWidget(p4)

def on_select(index):                                               #function to switch between plots
    if index == 0:
        p1.show()
        p2.hide()
        p3_packet.show()
        p4.hide()
    elif index == 1:
        p1.show()
        p2.hide()
        p3_packet.hide()
        p4.hide()
    elif index == 2:
        p1.hide()
        p2.show()
        p3_packet.hide()
        p4.hide()
    elif index == 3:
        p1.hide()
        p2.hide()
        p3_packet.show()
        p4.hide()
    else:
        p1.hide()
        p2.hide()
        p3_packet.hide()
        p4.show()

selector.currentIndexChanged.connect(on_select)

smooth_midi = [69.0]

def update():                                                       #update function for the plots, called by a timer
    global waterfall_buffer, chunk, p1_ymax, p2_ymax, p3_fft_ymax, last_selector
    start = tm.perf_counter()

    data = None
    try:
        while True:
            data, addr = sock.recvfrom(chunk_size * 2)
    except BlockingIOError:
        pass

    if data is None:
        return


    view_selector = data[0]    
    chunk = np.frombuffer(data[1:], dtype=np.int16)

    if len(chunk) < chunk_size:
        return

    chunk = chunk / np.max(np.abs(chunk))

    windowed_chunk = chunk * hann_window
    if view_selector != last_selector:
        selector.setCurrentIndex({0:1,1:3,2:4}.get(view_selector, 0))  # Update the selector based on the received data
        last_selector = view_selector


    fft_values = np.abs(np.array(fft(windowed_chunk)))[:chunk_size//2]       #perform fft, put it in an array and take the absolute value, for only positive frequencies
    fft_freqs = fftfreq(chunk_size, 1/sample_rate)[:chunk_size//2]  #get corresponding frequencies for the fft values
    fft_values_log = np.interp(log_freqs, fft_freqs, fft_values)    #interpolate the fft values to match the log frequency bins

    f,t,Sxx = spectrogram(chunk, fs=sample_rate, nperseg =512, noverlap=256, window ='hann') #make spectrogram
    magnitude_db_spec = 10 * np.log10(Sxx + 1e-10)                  #convert magnitude to logaritmic, avoid log(0)
    col = magnitude_db_spec.mean(axis=1)                            #average over time to get a single column for the waterfall plot    
    col_log = np.interp(log_freqs, f, col)                          #interpolate to match the log frequency bins
    graph1.setData(time.flatten(), chunk.astype(float).flatten())   #update waveform plot
    graph2.setData(fft_freqs.flatten(), fft_values.flatten())       #update FFT plot
    graph3_fft.setData(np.arange(len(log_freqs)), fft_values_log)
    waterfall_buffer = np.roll(waterfall_buffer, -1, axis=1)        #shift buffer to the left
    waterfall_buffer[:, -1] = col_log                               #add new column to the right of the buffer  
    graph3.setImage(waterfall_buffer, autoLevels=True)

    if np.max(np.abs(chunk)) > p1_ymax:                             #dynamically adjust y-axis if the signal exceeds 90% of the current max
        p1_ymax = p1_ymax * 1.5
        p1.setYRange(-p1_ymax, p1_ymax)
    if np.max(fft_values) > p2_ymax:
        p2_ymax = p2_ymax * 1.5
        p2.setYRange(0, p2_ymax)
    if np.max(fft_values) > p3_fft_ymax:
        p3_fft_ymax = p3_fft_ymax * 1.5
        p3_fft.setYRange(0, p3_fft_ymax)

    valid_freq = fft_freqs > 20
    if np.any(valid_freq):
        valid_fft = fft_values[valid_freq]
        valid_ffreqs = fft_freqs[valid_freq]
        peak_idx = np.argmax(valid_fft)                             #find the index of the peak in the FFT
        peak_freq = fft_freqs[valid_freq][peak_idx]                 #get the corresponding frequency
        peak_magnitude = valid_fft[peak_idx]                        #get the magnitude of the peak
        
        if 0 < peak_idx < len(valid_fft) -1:
            left = valid_fft[peak_idx-1]
            middle = valid_fft[peak_idx]
            right = valid_fft[peak_idx+1]
            correction = 0.5*(left-right)/(left-2*middle+right)
            bin_width = fft_freqs[1] - fft_freqs[0]
            peak_freq = valid_ffreqs[peak_idx] + correction * bin_width
        else:
            peak_freq = valid_ffreqs[peak_idx]

        midi_note = 69 + 12 * np.log2(max(peak_freq / 440, 1e-10))  #convert frequency to MIDI note number

        center = round(midi_note)                                   #get the nearest MIDI note number to the smoothed value

        for midi, rect in white_key_items.items():                  #reset all colors
            rect.setBrush(pg.mkBrush('w'))
        for midi, rect in black_key_items.items():
            rect.setBrush(pg.mkBrush('k'))

        if peak_magnitude > amplitude_threshold:                    #only show the detected note if it exceeds the amplitude threshold
            if center in white_key_items:                           #highlight the note by making the key red
                white_key_items[center].setBrush(pg.mkBrush('r'))
            elif center in black_key_items:
                black_key_items[center].setBrush(pg.mkBrush('r'))
            note_name = note_labels[center % 12]                    #get the name of the detected note
            octave = center // 12 - 1
            p4.setTitle(f'Detected Note: {note_name}{octave}')      #set the title to show the detected note and its frequency and amplitude
    end = tm.perf_counter()
    processing_time = (end-start)*1000
    p1.setTitle(f'Delay: {processing_time:.2f}ms')
    QtCore.QTimer.singleShot(5, update)

        
QtCore.QTimer.singleShot(0, update)

win.showMaximized()                                                 #show the window fullscreen
win.show()
app.exec()
```
</details>
