# Support Systems
Next to the large modules that are included in the project, there are also smaller modules that are used to support the main modules. These support systems are crucial for the overall functionality and performance of the project. In this section, multiple support systems will be discussed on their design, evaluation, and testing of these systems. The support systems that will be discussed include the following:
1. Audio output
2. Power supply
3. Selectable inputs
4. Playing guide
5. Housing

## Audio output
### Design description
The sound sculpture would be incomplete without a way to hear your own music. To ensure that the output is as close to the sound that is played, it is important to use a good speaker. It is also important that the speaker is loud enough to play in a classroom.  The Raspberry Pi has a headphone jack with a high output impedance. To drive a speaker, an amplifier must be used to supply enough power.

:::{figure} figures/06.HW_S_Support_Systems/audio-out.png
:name: fig-Audio-Out

An overview of the audio output system. The Raspberry Pi is connected to the amplifier which drives the speaker.
:::

A range of Dayton Audio full-range speakers have been considered 
([DMA45-4](https://www.soundimports.eu/nl/dayton-audio-dma45-4.html?_gl=1*13kucao*_up*MQ..*_gs*MQ..&gclid=CjwKCAjwt7XQBhBkEiwAtStpp-cy_475PLPy-5aEPtkTnRlxUGlxvTTyhHkZLHdgQxUM3eqTM_OeDxoC7vIQAvD_BwE&gbraid=0AAAAAoYHnTII_Pru-jKxNlsuvQknWskki), 
[DMA58-8](https://www.soundimports.eu/nl/dayton-audio-dma58-8.html?_gl=1*13kucao*_up*MQ..*_gs*MQ..&gclid=CjwKCAjwt7XQBhBkEiwAtStpp-cy_475PLPy-5aEPtkTnRlxUGlxvTTyhHkZLHdgQxUM3eqTM_OeDxoC7vIQAvD_BwE&gbraid=0AAAAAoYHnTII_Pru-jKxNlsuvQknWskki), 
[DMA70-4](https://www.soundimports.eu/nl/dayton-audio-dma70-4.html?_gl=1*13kucao*_up*MQ..*_gs*MQ..&gclid=CjwKCAjwt7XQBhBkEiwAtStpp-cy_475PLPy-5aEPtkTnRlxUGlxvTTyhHkZLHdgQxUM3eqTM_OeDxoC7vIQAvD_BwE&gbraid=0AAAAAoYHnTII_Pru-jKxNlsuvQknWskki), 
[CE41N-4](https://www.soundimports.eu/nl/dayton-audio-ce41n-4.html?_gl=1*13kucao*_up*MQ..*_gs*MQ..&gclid=CjwKCAjwt7XQBhBkEiwAtStpp-cy_475PLPy-5aEPtkTnRlxUGlxvTTyhHkZLHdgQxUM3eqTM_OeDxoC7vIQAvD_BwE&gbraid=0AAAAAoYHnTII_Pru-jKxNlsuvQknWskki), 
[DSA90-8](https://www.soundimports.eu/nl/dayton-audio-dsa90-8.html?_gl=1*13kucao*_up*MQ..*_gs*MQ..&gclid=CjwKCAjwt7XQBhBkEiwAtStpp-cy_475PLPy-5aEPtkTnRlxUGlxvTTyhHkZLHdgQxUM3eqTM_OeDxoC7vIQAvD_BwE&gbraid=0AAAAAoYHnTII_Pru-jKxNlsuvQknWskki))
 They have been considered on their price and frequency response. 

 | Speakers | Price (EUR) | Load (Ω) | Frequency Response |
|-----------|------------:|----------:|--------------------|
| DMA45-4  | 14.95 | 4 | Okay (poor low frequencies) |
| DMA58-8  | 19.95 | 8 | Okay (poor low frequencies) |
| DMA70-4  | 20.95 | 4 | Good (okay low frequencies) |
| CE41N-4  | 8.45 | 4 | Very poor |
| DSA90-8  | 34.95 | 8 | Excellent |

The selected speaker is the “[Dayton Audio DMA70-4](https://doc.soundimports.nl/pdf/brands/Dayton%20Audio/DMA70-4/pdf_Dayton%20Audio_DMA70-4_1.pdf)” it is a small high-performance full-range speaker. It has a relatively flat response curve, together with a good price. 

To choose the right amplifier the trade-off between power consumption and quality must be analysed. To keep the development simple, the power consumption must be low, as a high consumption prompts the cooling of the amplifier. A Class-D amplifier uses a square wave that is manipulated to control the sound. This makes it possible to reach high efficiencies. A suitable amplifier is the “PAM8302”. Adafruit made a module to simplify control the amplifier which is used in this project. [@tuite_understanding_amplifier_operating_classes]

### Evaluation and testing methods
The relevant requirements from the [program of requirements](02.ProgramofRequirements.md) are:
1.	The device must be able to adjust the volume from 0 to 100 percent of the amplifier’s maximum output.
2.	The speaker must produce a hearable sound that does not exceed 85 dB measured at a distance of 1 meter.
3.	The device must be electrically insulated and comply with standard safety regulations to ensure the user is protected from high-voltage hazards.

The input control will digitally control the volume of the amplifier. The volume will be controlled by a potentiometer that is connected to the ESP32. The volume will be adjusted from 0 to 100 percent of the amplifier’s maximum output.

#### Maximum volume and current test
The maximum volume test is designed to test the volume and current of all waveforms when the volume input is at 100% and the frequency is at 1520 Hz (as the datasheet for the speaker gives this as highest frequency response). Next to safety, the maximum current is also important to monitor the current distribution in the system.
Test setup:
1.	Take a (sound) decibel meter and place it 1 meter from the speaker.
2.	Install a current measuring at the VCC of the amplifier module (wire multimeter on current mode in series) 
3.	Turn on the system and tune the volume to 100%.
4.	Play all waveforms at 1520Hz, register the measured volumes and currents.

### Testing results and discussion
The maximum voltage and current test yielded the following result: 
| Waveform         | Volume [dB] | Current [mA] |
|------------------|------------:|-------------:|
| Sine wave        | 71.8        | 15.23        |
| Triangular wave  | 75.8        | 12.12        |
| Rectangular wave | 77.1        | 22.26        |
| No input         | 30.5        | 6.66         |

[](#Decibel-measurement-1) and [](#Decibel-measurement-2) give the test setup used to measure the volume and current of the amplifier.


:::{figure} figures/06.HW_S_Support_Systems/Decibel1.png
:name: Decibel-measurement-1
:width: 40%
The decibel meter (phone) is placed 1 meter from the speaker to measure the volume of the sound produced by the amplifier. 
:::

:::{figure} figures/06.HW_S_Support_Systems/Decibel2.png
:name: Decibel-measurement-2
:width: 40%
The current is measured by connecting a multimeter in series with the amplifier's power supply.
:::

### Conclusion
The volume of all waves does not exceed 85 dB. Therefore, the system complies with the first requirement. The current in combination with the maximum 5 volts is safe to work with, as the 
[Low Voltage Directive (LVD)](https://single-market-economy.ec.europa.eu/sectors/electrical-and-electronic-engineering-industries-eei/low-voltage-directive-lvd_en) 
only starts from 75 Volts DC and 50 AC. 

## Power supply
### Design description
All subsystems need power to work. Therefore, a power supply must be implemented. The system could run on batteries, mains power, or a USB cable. To reduce risk and ensure functionality, batteries and mains power are discarded. 
The standard for USB is at the time of writing USB4 which is exclusively for USB-C connectors. 

### Evaluation and testing methods
The [program of requirements](02.ProgramofRequirements.md) has two requirements about the power:
1.	The device must operate using a standard power supply (e.g. power socket, USB-C) OR Battery-powered with ≥ 4 hours runtime
2.	The device must be electrically insulated and comply with standard safety regulations to ensure the user is protected from high-voltage hazards.

To comply with the ease of development requirements a 
[USB-C breakout board](https://www.kiwi-electronics.com/nl/adafruit-usb-type-c-vertical-breakout-downstream-connection-20411?_gl=1*1o0sap3*_up*MQ..*_gs*MQ..&gclid=CjwKCAjwrNrQBhBjEiwAoR4VO0OTGlcToFo0BbeFLUphFj9g-DK6u0YqCkp-dTKtvjqLhVODM_Bq6hoCsSUQAvD_BwE&gbraid=0AAAAADuMvudUFQks9ECJ54SJ7t9Laiy6b)
is selected. It comes with 5.1kΩ resistors on the CC1 and CC2 pins to ensure the delivery of 5 volts.
The first requirement is met by the choice for a USB-C connection. The second requirement should be met by the resistors on the CC pins. This can simply be tested by using a multimeter.
### Testing results and discussion
The USB-C supplies 5V as seen in [](#USBC-test). 
Currently a breakout board is used. This gives the liability of wires that might come loose or snap. Using a USB-C directly on the motherboard would mitigate this weakness.

:::{figure} figures/06.HW_S_Support_Systems/USBC-test.png
:name: USBC-test
:width: 40%

The USB-C breakout board is tested with a multimeter to ensure that the voltage is 5V and that the resistors on the CC pins are present.
:::

### Conclusion
The USB-C can deliver the 5 volts required by the system. It is preferable to have the port directly attached to the motherboard.

## Selectable inputs 
### Design description
The theremin has a lot of inputs that can be controlled by the user. The most prominent being the pitch and volume control. However, waveform selection, display selection, autotune, and the calibration must also be implemented. The pitch is controlled by the capacitive sensor, which is already covered extensively in the chapter about [sensing](04.HW_S_Sensing.md).
For the remaining controls, visual and tactile feedback should be considered, as they are the main driver for the ease of use. To confirm selections, indicative LEDs next to the labels on the housing should be used. Switches should have a distinct on and off position with a firm click to allow for manipulation without looking.
The volume is controlled by a potentiometer, delivering a voltage between 0.3 and 3 v as the ESP requires. To keep it close to a mixing panel it will be a linear slider. 
The selection controls can be done by either rotary encoders or rotary switches. This allows for easy selection between multiple options. For a rotary encoder, the state can be returned to the user by a simple LED. With a rotary switch, the LEDs can be part of the circuit to create a 3.3V logic high when the circuit is closed and a logic low when the circuit is open.

### Evaluation and testing methods
The [program of requirements](02.ProgramofRequirements.md) has three requirements about the selectable inputs:
1.	The device must provide the possibility to select between 3 different waveforms (sinusoidal, block, and sawtooth wave)
2.	The device must be able to adjust the volume from 0 to 100 percent of the amplifier’s maximum output.
3.	Basic circuit design, with commonly available electrical components, shall be used to create the internal hardware.
The only way to evaluate these components is by inspection and measurement of the output voltages. 

### Testing results and discussion
The right components were not shipped in time, prompting the creation of a small control board where the rotary switches are replaced with regular switches. The linear slider has also been changed to a rotary potentiometer, as seen in [](#Control-Board). The control board is designed to handle the selection of waveforms, display, autotune, and calibration. The volume is controlled by a rotary potentiometer. The switches are used for the selection of waveforms and display. the autotune and calibration are controlled by buttons. The LEDs provide visual feedback for the selections.

:::{figure} figures/06.HW_S_Support_Systems/Controlboard.png
:name: Control-Board
:width: 40%

The control board is designed to handle the selection of waveforms, display, autotune, and calibration. The volume is controlled by a rotary potentiometer. The switches are used for the autotune, the selection of waveforms, and display.   Calibration is controlled by a button. The LEDs provide visual feedback for the selections.
:::

The connections work and the right voltages are outputted. Note that the ESP has its own built-in pull-up and pull-down resistors. Making the LED resistor combination only functional for the visual feedback.

Lastly, the use of either rotary switches or rotary encoderrs should be weighed. The switch is easy to understand, and the encoder is easily scalable. If the selection should teach about basic electronics, it would be better to use the switches

### Conclusion
The LEDs add to the user experience by delivering direct feedback on their inputs. Due to a shipping problem the haptic experience is less emphasized.

(sec-playing-guide)=
## Playing guide
### Design description
To help new players get acquainted with the instrument, a playing guide is needed. This playing guide should also help the calibration of the instrument.
To keep the design simple an array of LEDs will be used. These will light up one by one to signal where a hand should go. To minimize the amount of output pins needed, two 4-to-16 muxes will be used. This reduces the number of pins needed from 32 to 7. 
2 enable pins, 4 input pins and a signal pin. Since only one LED is on at a time, a single resistor can be shared for all LEDs

### Evaluation and testing methods
To test the functionality of the LEDs, the Raspberry Pi cycles through all the possible outputs. A visual inspection will reveal any breaks. 
### Testing results and discussion
This test has been performed and the system is working. Chapter [](09.HW_S_Integration.md) shows a video of the playing guide in action ([](#fig-LED1)). 
### Conclusion
Individual LEDs are easy to understand, and reliable for calibration. 

## Housing
### Design description
The sound sculpture is a standalone product. Therefore, all functionalities must be supported on the housing. The sculpture should also be intuitive. To achieve this mimicking a well-known product helps a lot. The chosen product is a mixing console as it is a successful audio manipulation product.
To keep the design easily tuneable, the method of [parametric design](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parametric_design) is used. The software used is Rhino 8 with the [grasshopper 3D](https://www.grasshopper3d.com/) extension. 
To create the shape, a basic prism is constructed by first defining the face and then the depth. The face consists of 5 parameters: back height (BH), front height (FH), back depth (BD), diagonal depth (DD), and front depth (FD). 
:::{figure} figures/06.HW_S_Support_Systems/Housing-face.png
:name: house-face
:width: 40%
The face of the housing is defined by 5 parameters: back height (BH), front height (FH), back depth (BD), diagonal depth (DD), and front depth (FD). The face is then extruded to create the housing.
:::
This face is extruded to match the desired depth to create the base shape of the sculpture. The modelled components are added to give an idea of the final product and to find the holes for assembly. 
:::{figure} figures/06.HW_S_Support_Systems/3D-render.png
:name: 3D-render
:width: 40%

A 3D render of the housing with the modelled components. 
:::

### Evaluation and testing methods
The [program of requirements](02.ProgramofRequirements.md) has nineteen requirements about the selectable inputs:
**Functional requirements**
1.	The device shall provide visual representation of the waveforms.
2.	The device shall include an integrated speaker system for audio output.   
**Curiosity & Engagement (“Magical” Interaction)**
3.	The device must include a contactless sensing method for sensing the hand of the user during interaction.
4.	The housing of the device shall enable intuitive interaction from the user
5.	The housing of the device shall be aesthetically appealing for the target audience.  
**Ease of Use**
6.	All inputs shall be clearly labelled on the housing.
7.	The housing of the device shall withstand user wear.  
**Cost Constraints**
8.	The cost of the hardware of end-product shall not exceed €120.  
**Physical Requirements**
9.	The housing, excluding a possible antenna, size shall not exceed 40 x 30 x 20 cm.
10.	The total weight of the device shall not exceed 2 kg.
11.	The housing shall include appropriate carrying features.
12.	The housing must withstand minor impacts and scratches from normal use.
13.	The device must operate using a standard power supply (e.g. power socket, USB-C).
14.	The device shall be made portable by making sure that parts that are sticking out can fold in or be removed and carried separately.  
**Additional Criteria**
15.	There shall be no external wiring.
16.	The housing shall not have sharp edges or corners that may cause injury.
17.	The device shall remain stable while placed on a flat surface during operation.
18.	The design shall allow access for maintenance and possible repairs.
19.	The device must be electrically insulated and comply with standard safety regulations to ensure the user is protected from high-voltage hazards.
Most of these requirements are covered by the design and choice of material. As wood is a durable material which can be sanded and varnished, most criteria can be checked by inspection. The weight and size can be measured.

### Testing results and discussion
| Requirement | Met or not met | Comment |
|------------|----------------|---------|
| 1 | Met | Prototype uses HDMI and external screen. Final product allows for a built-in screen. |
| 2 | Met | The housing houses the speaker. |
| 3 | Met | The housing houses the antenna. |
| 4 | Not met | Awaits user testing. |
| 5 | Not met | Awaits user testing. |
| 6 | Not met | The inputs cannot be integrated because of late shipping. |
| 7 | Met | Normal use does not impact the wood. |
| 8 | Met | The wood only costs €21. |
| 9 | Met | Measures 30 × 26 × 10 cm. |
| 10 | Not met | Yet to be weighed. |
| 11 | Met | The design is easy to pick up; adding handles would not be appropriate. |
| 12 | Met | Normal use does not impact the wood. |
| 13 | Met | USB-C port included. |
| 14 | Not met | The antenna is not easily removable; the final product should use a screw-in antenna. |
| 15 | Met | Apart from the HDMI and USB-C, there are no external wires. |
| 16 | Met | Edges are sanded. |
| 17 | Met | The device is stable; for the final model, tunable rubber feet can be added to mitigate warped wood. |
| 18 | Met | The faceplate is not glued down. In the final model, this can be supported by hinges. |
| 19 | Met | The voltage does not surpass 5V, therefore no extra precautions have to be taken. |

### Conclusion
The parametric design of the housing makes it possible to easily reform the housing. Some minor changes, like the unscrewable antenna needs to be made before it is ready for the final product.