(chapter-sp-overview)=
# Signal Processing Subsystem Overview



The choices for separating the processing into two different processing units was done based on the functions that are determined based on the set in- and outputs. The signal processing subgroup focusses on building a system which consists of the following target functionalities:

1. **Sensor Interpretation:** The system can digitize the physical sensor outputs. These include frequency control, amplitude control, wave setting, calibration and autotune control.

1. **Waveform Generation:** The system can translate the frequency and amplitude controls into a digital waveform in the audible frequency domain and of acceptable volume.

1. **Waveform Manipulation:** The system can vary the type of digital waveform from a sine to a block and to a triangle wave.

1. **Audio Generation:** The system can convert the digital waveform into an analog signal.

1. **Visualization:** The system can visualize the generated signal in time and frequency domain.

1. **Calibration:** The system can manually calibrate the frequency range which is translated into the audible range.

1. **Quantization / Autotune:** The system can discretize the frequency of a played note.

1. **Playing Guide:** The system can guide a player to produce a recognizable song.

The problem that is faced is that on the one hand both audio and visual processing must be done, which are both recourse intensive. On the other hand, the sensor digital readout requires some analog to digital conversion. For the audio and visual processing a Raspberry Pi 4B was chosen, due to the availability of a 3.5mm jack and a graphics driver which outputs to micro HDMI. The drawback of this device is that it does not have a built in ADC. Possible solutions for this are using an external dedicated ADC or using a micro controller with built in ADCs. Because the sensor interpretation part needs to read out multiple signals, the choice was made to use a micro controller for all sensor inputs. The necessary processing and conversion of the values is done on this chip to minimise the amount of information needed to pass to the microprocessor. An ESP32 is used for this purpose, this choice is further elaborated in [](#subsec-esp).

The division between microprocessor and micro controller is as follows:

**Micro Controller**
- Sensor Interpretation
- Calibration
- Quantization / Autotune
- Transmitting settings

**Microprocessor**
- Receiving settings
- Waveform Generation
- Waveform Manipulation
- Audio Generation
- Playing Guide


## Signal Processing Program of Requirements

Must-have
Frequency control:
- The system must accept a block wave with an amplitude range of 0 to 3.3 V.
- The system must determine the frequency of a block wave with a maximum of 20MHz.
- The input signal’s frequency must be detected with a resolution of at least 100Hz.
- The system must translate the measured frequency control into keynotes between 40 Hz and 4 kHz.

Setting control:
- The system must accept an amplitude control signal
- The system must accept a waveform selection signal
- The system must accept a calibration control signal
- The system must accept an autotune select signal
- The translation of the frequency must be calibratable by defining upper and/or lower bounds of the sensor using the setting.
- The system must translate the position of the amplitude slider into a wave amplitude between 0 and 3.3 V. 
- The form of the waveform must be selectable by the selector into a sine, a block and a triangle wave.

Output:
- The generated waveform must be converted from digital to analogue and outputted via a Digital-to-Analog Converter (DAC).
- Frequency analysis must be performed on the generated signal to determine characteristics such as its frequency components and amplitude. 
- The measured frequency and amplitude results must be displayed in a clear and readable format on the system’s display. 

- The subsystem must cost less than €50.



## Integration Controller and Processor
To communicate between the two devices a Universal Asynchronous Receive Transmit protocol (UART) is used. This protocol is integrated in both the micro controller and processor. The UART protocol communicates characters at a certain Baud rate, which needs to be the same at both devices, the timing, however does not need to be synced, as the bits are handled FIFO. The most important feature is that the data sent is in the form of ASCII characters, which consist of only 1 byte. This means characters such as `\n` can be used as separators. On the receiving end, these characters can be detected, as well as `int`, `float` or other datatypes can be extracted from read strings using `sscanf("%d",&i)`.