# Microcontroller Subsystem

## Introduction
As discussed in the previous chapter, the microcontroller should mainly function as an input controller. It will receive the following inputs:

1. **Sensor oscillations:** The user's hand forms a variable capacitor with an antenna. This variable capacitor will be part of an oscillator, which oscillates around 900 kHz. The frequency of the oscillator will give information on the position of the hand.  
2. **Calibration button:** The capacitance of the variable capacitor is dependent on the surroundings of the sound sculpture. Therefore, the sculpture should be calibrated whenever it is put inside a new environment. The user can do this by putting his hand on multiple known positions and then pressing a button to record the frequency at this position. 
3. **Auto-tune switch:** The sound sculpture will accommodate an Auto-tune function, which will make it easier to play. A switch is used to enable this functionality. 
4. **Amplitude slider:** The amplitude of the sound will be determined by a slider. 
5. **Waveform selection switch:** The sound sculpture will be able to play multiple waveforms. A 3-way switch is used to select between a sine, a triangle and a square wave. 
6. **Visualization selection switch:** The display can visualize multiple features of the sound. A 3-way switch is used to select different visuals on the display. 

The microcontroller will process all of these inputs and will send the amplitude, frequency and waveform-type (square, sine or triangle) to the microprocessor. The connection between the processor and the controller will be done using a UART protocol. 

Furthermore, the microcontroller will also be used to calibrate the system and to auto-tune the played notes. 


## Theory 

(subsec-esp)=
### Choosing a Microcontroller 

To accommodate all of these functions, the right microcontroller should be chosen. Since there are a lot of microcontrollers to choose from, three candidates were chosen for further evaluation to keep the selection process manageable and maintain project progress. The Arduino Uno, ESP32 Wroom and Teensy 4.0 were all considered. The specifications of each controller can be seen in the table below ({numref}`micro_table`).

```{table} Comparing the specifications of the different microcontrollers with each other.
:name: micro_table


| Spec              | Arduino Uno | ESP32 Wroom | Teensy 4.0 |
|-------------------|:------------:|:------------:|:------------:|
| Price             | €30         | €25         | €30         |
| Clock             | 16 MHz      | 240 MHz     | 600 MHz     |
| Flash Memory      | 32 kB       | 4 MB        | 2 MB        |
| Operating Voltage | 5 V         | 3.3 V       | 3.3 V       |
| Digital Pins      | 14          | 30          | 40          |
| Analog Inputs     | 6           | 18          | 14          |
| ADC               | 10-bit      | 12-bit      | 12-bit      |
| DAC               | 12-bit      | 8-bit       | – (use audio adaptor) |
| Sampling Frequency| ~50 kHz     | 200 kHz     | >1 MHz      |
| Pulse counter     | yes         | yes         | no          |
```
*Source: {cite}`comparing_microcontrollers`*


The Arduino Uno does not have enough memory to accommodate for large pieces of code and it also does not have a lot of input pins. Therefore it was decided not to use the Arduino Uno.

Both the ESP32 and the Teensy have enough input pins to accommodate for all the features. The Teensy is useful for real-time audio processing because of its fast clock rate and high sample frequency. However, the ESP32 is also sufficient for this application. The advantage of an ESP32 is that it has a built-in frequency counter, which makes it easier to measure the frequency of an input signal. It was therefore decided to use an ESP32 for this project.


### Frequency Scaling
The goal of the sound sculpture is to convert the position of a hand relative to the antenna into an audible sound. The hand position is first translated into an oscillation frequency by a capacitive oscillator circuit. A microcontroller then maps this oscillator frequency to a frequency within the audible range. Since the relationship between hand position and oscillator frequency is non-linear, the conversion cannot be performed using a simple linear scaling. Furthermore, the output frequency should follow a logarithmic response rather than a linear one, as human pitch perception is logarithmic in nature.

The relation between the oscillator and the hand position depends on two things. Firstly, it depends on the relation between the hand position and capacitance of the antenna. It is difficult to accurately determine this relationship, since this is the capacitance between a metal rod (the antenna) and a linear plate (hand). The relation gets approximated with the formula for capacitance of two parallel plates. Secondly, the frequency also depends on the oscillator circuit. The frequency relation of a Colpitts oscillator was used for this. 

The formula for a parallel plate capacitor can be seen below in {eq}`capacitance-formula`:

$$
C = C_0 + \frac{\epsilon_0A}{d}
$$ (capacitance-formula)

where:
- $C$ = total capacitance [F]

- $C_0$ = background capacitance [F]

- $\epsilon_0$ = vacuum permittivity ($8.854 \times 10^{-12} F/m$)

- $A$ = plate area [m²]

- $d$ = plate separation [m]



The frequency of a Colpitts oscillator can be seen in the formula below {eq}`eq-colpitt`:

$$
f = \frac{1}{2\pi \sqrt{LC}}
$$ (eq-colpitt)

where:
- $f$ = frequency of oscillator [Hz]
- $L$ = inductance in oscillator [H]
- $C$ = total capacitance [F] 

By combining these two formulas, the following formula is obtained {eq}`eq-hand_pos_to_freq2`, which is simplified to equation {eq}`eq-hand_pos_to_freq`:

$$
f = \frac{1}{2\pi \sqrt{L (C_0 + \frac{\epsilon _0  A}{d})}}
$$ (eq-hand_pos_to_freq2)

$$
f = \frac{1}{2\pi \sqrt{LC_0}} \times \frac{1}{\sqrt{1+\frac{\epsilon _0 A}{d C_0}}}
$$

$$
f = \frac{A}{\sqrt{1+\frac{B}{d}}}
$$ (eq-hand_pos_to_freq)

where:
- $f$ = frequency of oscillator [Hz]
- $A$ = constant related to the maximum frequency
- $B$ = constant related to the relative hand-capacitance strength
- $d$ = distance of the hand [m] 


If it is assumed that everything except distance stays constant, there are only two values which should be optimized to find a good fit for the relation between distance and frequency. The hand distance can be found by inverting the formula above. 

To map the hand distance to the right frequencies it is important to know the science behind music. Music is composed of octaves which are made from notes. Each octave contains 12 notes and has a frequency exactly twice that of the previous octave. By representing each note as a number, the relation shown in the formula below {eq}`eq-note_to_freq` can be found.

$$
f = f_0 \cdot 2^{\frac{n}{12}}
$$ (eq-note_to_freq)

where:
- $f$ is the output frequency [Hz]
- $f_0$ is the lowest frequency of the sound sculpture [Hz]
- $n$ is the note that is being played.

This formula can be used to transform a linear range of notes to correct sounding musical frequencies. 

The table in {numref}`notes_to_freq` below shows the "correct" frequencies for each musical note.

```{figure} figures/notes_to_freq.webp
:name: notes_to_freq
:width: 50%


The frequencies of each note (rows) in each octave (columns).
```

###  Least Squares Regression
A least squares regression line represents the relationship between variables in a scatter plot. The line is of the form y = ax + b. The point of a least squares line is to minimize the total error between the line and the data points. The residual can be calculated by summing the squares of the individual errors. This is called the sum of squared errors (SSE), which can be seen in the following equation {eq}`eq-SSE`.


$$
\text{SSE} = \sum_{i=1}^{n} \left(y_i - (a x_i + b)\right)^2
$$ (eq-SSE)


The SSE can be minimized by equating the derivative of the SSE to zero. 
This results in the following values for a {eq}`eq-LS1` and b {eq}`eq-LS2`:

$$
a =
\frac{
n\sum x_i y_i
-
(\sum x_i)(\sum y_i)
}{
n\sum x_i^2
-
(\sum x_i)^2
}
$$ (eq-LS1)

and

$$
b
=
\left(\frac{\sum_{}{} y_i}{n}\right)
-
a\left(\frac{\sum_{}{} x_i}{n}\right)
$$ (eq-LS2)


where:
- $n$ is the number of samples.
- $x_i$ is the x position of sample i.
- $y_i$ is the y position of sample i.

*Source: {cite}`linear_regression`*

## Method  
A Nassi-Shneiderman diagram of the code can be seen in the Figure below ({numref}`nassi-schneiderman`). In the setup phase, the ESP32 starts with initializing the pulse counter and the input control. Then it will calibrate the system. In the loop phase, the ESP32 will continuously measure the input pulses, calculate the right output frequency, measure the amplitude and measure the waveform. The last step is to send all this data to the microprocessor using a UART connection. All of the source code on the microcontroller that was used for this project can be seen in the appendix {ref}`source_code_ESP`. 

```{figure} figures/nassi_schneiderman_diagram.png
:name: nassi-schneiderman
:width: 30%

A Nassi-Shneiderman diagram of the code on the ESP32.
```

### Frequency measurement
The frequency measurements are performed using the ESP32's built-in pulse counter (PCNT) and timer. Every 20 ms, the timer expires and executes a callback function. This callback reads the pulse counter value and stops the counting process. After the measurement has been processed, the pulse counter is cleared and the timer is restarted to begin a new measurement. A physical wire between pin 32 and pin 35 is used to stop and enable the pulse counter.

The pulse counter unit uses a 16-bit signed register {cite}`datasheet_esp32`. This means that the largest number it can represent is +32767. When it reaches this number, the counter resets. This is undesirable. Therefore, an interrupt is generated at 25 000 pulses and the counter is reset. The number of overflows can be counted and used to keep track of the actual pulse count. This will allow the ESP32 to keep track of much higher values than the initial 16-bit register. 

The code that was used is based on the code for a precision frequency meter ({cite}`pulse_counter`).
 
### Calibration
The capacitance of the antenna depends not only on the user's hand, but also on the surroundings. It is therefore essential to first calibrate the antenna. The user can do this by holding his hand consecutively on 5 cm, 10 cm, 20 cm and 30 cm and pressing a button each time. The frequency of the oscillator is recorded whenever a button is pressed. When the calibration process has finished, the ESP32 has obtained 4 different data points. 

The code fits a curve through the points which will map the frequency to the position of the user's hand. The relation between the distance of the user's hand and the oscillator frequency is explained in the theory section (equation: {eq}`eq-hand_pos_to_freq`). The goal of the calibration function is to find the value for A and B. This can be done by rewriting the formula and then using least squares regression.

Rewriting this equation yields the following formulas {eq}`eq-linear`:

$$
f = \frac{A}{\sqrt{1+\frac{B}{d}}}
$$

$$
\frac{1}{f^2} = \frac{1+\frac{B}{d}}{A^2}
$$

$$
\frac{1}{f^2} = \frac{1}{A^2} + \frac{B}{A^2} \frac{1}{d}
$$ (eq-linear)

By substituting Y for $1/f^2$ and X for $1/d$, a linear relationship between the two variables is obtained.

Fitting a linear equation through a number of data points can be done using a least squares regression fit described by equation {eq}`eq-LS1` and {eq}`eq-LS2`.

By combining these two formulas, the values for A and B can be found. By inverting equation {eq}`eq-hand_pos_to_freq`, the user's hand position can be obtained based on the input frequency. 

In order to give the correct frequency output, the hand position should first be normalized. This is simply done by dividing it by the maximum hand distance of 30 cm. The function will then multiply this normalized distance with the note that should be played. In this way, a hand position is converted to a musical note. The relation between notes and frequency which was described by equation {eq}`eq-note_to_freq`, was then used to output the correct frequency.

### Auto-tune
The auto-tune functionality is connected to a switch. When the switch is turned on, this function should automatically adjust the pitch of the audio. It will make the sound sculpture easier to play by correcting off-key notes. The auto-tune uses the inverse of equation {eq}`eq-note_to_freq` to convert the frequency of the audio to notes. The note will probably not be an exact note, but will likely contain a little offset. The auto-tune function will round the note to integer values. This will correct the offset. Equation {eq}`eq-note_to_freq` is then used to convert the perfect note back into playable frequencies. 

### Amplitude slider
The amplitude of the audio can be manipulated using a potentiometer. The potentiometer is connected to an analogue pin of the ESP32. The ESP32 uses 12-bit ADCs, this means that the amplitude selection has a range of 4096. The input voltage gets converted to an integer between 0 and 4096. This number is sent to the microprocessor using the UART connection. 

### Waveform selection
The waveform can be selected using a 3-way rotary switch. This switch is connected to the ESP32 using 2 digital pins. When none of the pins are selected, a sine wave is produced. When the left pin is selected, a triangle wave is made and when the right pin is selected, a square wave is made. The data of the rotary switch is transmitted by sending a 0, 1 or 2 via the UART connection. 

### Visualization selection 
The visualization can also be selected using a 3-way rotary switch. The code is the same as the code for the waveform selection. The user can choose between visualizing the waveform in time and frequency domain and visualizing the notes. The data of the rotary switch is sent using a UART connection as 0, 1 or 2. 


### Pin layout
The layout for all the connected in/output pins can be seen in the table below ({numref}`pin_layout`). 


```{table} The pin layout of the microcontroller in the sound sculpture
:name: pin_layout

| Subsystem | ESP32 Pin(s) | Purpose |
|:---------:|:------------:|:--------|
| Pulse Counter | GPIO 34 | oscillator frequency input |
| Pulse Counter | GPIO 32 ↔ GPIO 35 | Internal pulse-count connection |
| UART | GPIO 17 | TX (Transmit) |
| UART | GPIO 16 | RX (Receive) |
| Controls | GPIO 5 | Calibration button |
| Controls | GPIO 4 | Amplitude slider |
| Controls | GPIO 22, GPIO 23 | Rotary switch waveform selection |
| Controls | GPIO 12 | Auto-tune switch |
| Controls | GPIO 18, GPIO 19 | Rotary switch visualization selection |
```


## Results
Multiple tests were conducted to check if the requirements ({ref}`chapter-sp-overview`) were met. The tests consisted of frequency measurements, calibration measurements and timing delay measurements. 

### Frequency measurement
The accuracy of the frequency measurement is found by connecting the system to a function generator. The function generator will mimic the antenna by generating a known frequency. The error between the function generator and the pulse counter is calculated. The results are shown in the table below ({numref}`freq_measurements`).

```{table} Frequency measurements of the pulse counter module
:name: freq_measurements
:width: 40%
| Input frequency [Hz] | Measured frequency [Hz] | Error [Hz] |
|:-------------------:|:----------------------:|:----------:|
| 500,000 | 499,696 | -304 |
| 550,000 | 549,663 | -337 |
| 600,000 | 599,630 | -370 |
| 650,000 | 649,608 | -392 |
| 700,000 | 699,575 | -425 |
| 750,000 | 749,545 | -455 |
| 800,000 | 799,515 | -485 |
| 850,000 | 849,482 | -518 |
| 900,000 | 899,450 | -550 |
| 950,000 | 949,420 | -580 |
| 1,000,000 | 999,387 | -613 |
```
The pulse counter operates with a measurement interval of 20 ms. Consequently, a single measurement has a frequency resolution of 1/0.02 = 50 Hz. To improve the resolution, the software averages 20 samples. This results in an effective resolution of 2.5 Hz.

Resetting the timer and averaging takes approximately 0.080 ms. 

### Calibration
The calibration uses 4 different hand positions. It will take the user approximately 10 seconds to calibrate the system. 

The accuracy of the calibration was tested using 2 different environments. The results can be seen in {numref}`curve_fit2` and {numref}`curve_fit3`. The value for A, B and the sum of squared errors is shown in {numref}`tab-curvefit`

```{table} The values for A, B and SSE in two different environments
:name: tab-curvefit
:width: 40%

|  | constant A | constant B | Sum of Squared Errors (SSE)|
|:-------------------:|:----------------------:|:----------:|:----------:|
| environment 1 | 631,785| 0.011032 | 44,904,331 |
| environment 2 | 636,564 | 0.025557 | 110,825,576 | 


```


```{figure} figures/curve_fit2.png
:name: curve_fit2
:width: 50%

The curve fit and the data points of the first environment.
```




```{figure} figures/curve_fit3.png
:name: curve_fit3
:width: 50%

The curve fit and the data points of the second environment.
```

The delay of the entire calibration in the loop is approximately 0.140 ms. This includes the conversion from input frequency to hand position and the conversion from hand position to output frequency. 


### Input Control
The auto-tune switch, calibration button, amplitude slider, waveform switch and visualization switch can all be selected without any false negatives or false positives. During the test period, all these inputs worked 100 percent of the time.

The average delay per sub module can be seen in the table below ({numref}`tab-delay`).

```{table} The average delays per sub module in the loop.
:name: tab-delay
:width: 40%

|   sub module             | delay [ms] |
|:-------------------:|:----------------------:|
| frequency counter | 20.080|
| Calibration | 0.140 | 
| Auto-tune | 0.202 |
| Amplitude select | 0.405 |
| Waveform select | 0.021 |
| UART | 0.211 |
| Total | 21.248 |

```
## Discussion 

The frequency counter has an effective resolution of 2.5 Hz. This is a great resolution, since each pulse only lasts for a few microseconds. However, the frequency counter also has a small offset. This offset grows linearly with frequency. At 1 MHz the offset is -613 Hz. The offset is  613 Hz * 0.02 s = 12.26 pulses. Each pulse is only 1 microsecond long. That means that the timer probably lasts 12.26 microseconds shorter. The pulse counter is read after 19.98774 ms instead of the 20 ms that was anticipated. Fortunately, the offset is not significant, because the entire system is calibrated. This ensures that the exact values do not matter and only the difference between those values matters. 

{numref}`curve_fit2` and {numref}`curve_fit3` show that the curve is not perfectly fitted. There is a relatively large discrepancy between the fitted curve and the data points for both figures. This is partly explained by electric noise influencing the capacitance of the antenna and thereby the frequency of the oscillator.
Even when the user's hand was at the same position, the frequency of the oscillator varied by several tens of kilohertz. This made it difficult to play the exact same tone. 

The distance-frequency relation {numref}`eq-hand_pos_to_freq` that was used for the curve fit also uses some questionable approximations, which could also explain the difference between the data points and the fitted line. 
Firstly, it approximates the antenna-hand capacitance as a parallel plate capacitor. This is not a very good approximation, since the antenna is round. The real capacitance will probably be described by a difficult formula which uses both the formula for parallel plate capacitor and the formula for a (partly) cylindrical capacitor. 
Secondly, the parallel plate formula that was used does not take fringing effects into account. It therefore only holds when the distance between the plates is smaller than the surface of the plates. When the user's hand is held far away from the antenna, this relation breaks down. To better describe the relation, a formula which also uses the additional capacitances due to the fringing effects should be used. 

## Conclusion
The microcontroller can receive five different inputs: the frequency from the oscillator, the calibration button, the amplitude slider, the auto-tune switch, and the waveform selection switch. These inputs are all processed by the microcontroller and output via UART as frequency, amplitude, and waveform data.

The microcontroller used is an ESP32 because of its built-in pulse counter module, which makes it easier to accurately calculate the frequency of the input signal.

The frequency of the input signal is measured by reading the built-in pulse counter register every 20 ms and then clearing it.

When the user starts the sound sculpture, the first task of the ESP32 is to calibrate the system. This is done by measuring four different hand positions. The data points are used to fit the following formula:

$$
f = \frac{A}{\sqrt{1+\frac{B}{d}}}
$$

The values of A and B depend on the environment. These values are determined during the calibration process and can then be used to convert the input frequency back to a linear range of hand positions.

Once the calibration process is complete, the code enters the `loop()` function. The loop starts by performing a frequency measurement. This measurement is then averaged with the previous 20 samples. This is done to ensure that the frequency changes smoothly and does not exhibit large spikes between valid measurements.

After the measurement is complete, the input frequency is mapped to a corresponding output frequency. This is done using Equation {eq}`eq-hand_pos_to_freq` and Equation {eq}`eq-note_to_freq`.

If the user has enabled the auto-tune switch, the ESP32 also maps the frequencies to discrete musical notes.

After the frequency has been calculated and mapped, the ESP32 reads the amplitude slider and the waveform selection switch. This data, together with the frequency, is sent to the microprocessor via a UART connection.

The amplitude and waveform selection are calculated without giving any false positives or false negatives. The frequency is also measured to a high accuracy. However, mapping this input frequency to the correct output frequency proved to be more challenging. The calibration process relies heavily on approximations and is also affected by noise in the input signal. This made it difficult to calibrate the sound sculpture accurately.


### Programme of requirements
In the previous chapter ({ref}`chapter-sp-overview`) the requirements for the subsystem are explained. Most of the requirements were met. The requirements which are not met are explained below in more detail. 

- **The system must determine the frequency of a block wave with a maximum frequency of 20 MHz.**

This requirement was not tested since the oscillator circuit has a maximum frequency of 950 kHz. It was therefore not necessary for the system to measure such a large frequency.

- **The translation of the frequency must be calibratable by defining upper and/or lower sensor bounds using the calibration setting.**

The system can be effectively calibrated when the input remains relatively stable. However, calibration becomes more challenging under large frequency variations, and the system's performance is further affected by significant approximation errors.

### Future work
Future work could focus on developing improved mapping functions for the calibration of the input signal. This proved to be difficult in the current design. Better results could be achieved when the mapping function is a better approximation of what is actually happening. This can be done by also modeling fringing effects and using a combination of the capacitance between a rod and a parallel plate. 
