# Microcontroller Subsystem

## Introduction
As discussed in the previous chapter, the microcontroller should mainly function as an input controller. It will receive the following inputs:

1. **Sensor oscillations:** Your hand forms a variable capacitor with an antenna. This variable capacitor will be part of an oscillator, which oscillates around 900 kHz. The frequency of the oscillator will give you information on the position of the hand.  
2. **calibration button:** The capacitance of the variable capacitor is dependent on the surroundings of the theremin. Therefore the theremin should be calibrated whenever it is put inside a new environment. This is done by putting you hand on multiple known positions and than pressing a button to record the oscillations at this position. 
3. **AutoTune switch:** The theremin will accommodate an AutoTune function, which will make it easier to play. A switch is used to enable this functionality. 
4. **Amplitude slider:** The amplitude of the sound will be determined by a slider. 
5. **Waveform selection switch:** The theremin will be able to play multiple waveforms. A 3-way switch is used to select between a sine, a triangle and a block wave. 

The microcontroller will process all of these inputs and will send the the amplitude, frequency and waveform-type (square, sine or triangle) to the microprocessor. The connection between the processor and the controller will be done using an UART protocol. 

Furthermore the microcontroller will also be used to calibrate the system and to autoTune the played notes. 



## Theory 

### Choosing a Microcontroller 

To accommodate all of these functions, the right microcontroller should be chosen. Since there are a lot of microcontrollers to chose from, three candidates were chosen for further evaluation to keep the selection process manageable and maintain project progress. The Arduino Uno an ESP32 Wroom and a Teensy 4.0 were all considered. The specifications of each controller can be seen in the table below ({numref}`micro_table`).

```{table} comparing the specifications of the different microcontrollers with each other.
:name: micro_table

| Spec              | Arduino Uno | ESP32 Wroom | Teensy 4.0 |
|-------------------|:------------:|:------------:|:------------:|
| Price             | €30         | €25         | €30         |
| Clock             | 16 MHz      | 240 MHz     | 600 MHz     |
| Flash Memory      | 32 kB       | 4 MB        | 2 MB        |
| Operating Voltage | 5 V         | 3.3 V       | 3.3 V       |
| Digital Pins      | 14          | 30          | 40          |
| Analog Inputs     | 6           | 18          | 14          |
| ADC               | 10 bit      | 12 bit      | 12 bit      |
| DAC               | 12 bit      | 8 bit       | – (use audio adaptor) |
| Sampling Frequency| ~50 kHz     | 200 kHz     | >1 MHz      |
| Pulse counter     | yes         | yes         | no          |
```
*Source: {cite}`comparing_microcontrollers`*


The Arduino Uno does not have a enough memory to accommodate for large pieces of code and it also does not have a lot of input pins. Therefore we will not use an Arduino

Both the ESP32 and the Teensy have enough input pins to accommodate for all our features. The Teensy is useful for real time audio processing because of its fast clock rate and high sample frequency. However for our applications the ESP32 will also do fine. It was therefore decided to use an ESP32, because we already had one lying around to test with.


### frequency scaling
The goal of the theremin is to convert the position of a hand relative to the antenna into an audible sound. The hand position is first translated into an oscillation frequency by a capacitive oscillator circuit. A microcontroller then maps this oscillator frequency to a frequency within the audible range. Since the relationship between hand position and oscillator frequency is non-linear, the conversion cannot be performed using a simple linear scaling. Furthermore, the output frequency should follow a logarithmic response rather than a linear one, as human pitch perception is logarithmic in nature.

The relation between the oscillator and the hand position depends on two things. Firstly it depends on the relation between the hand position and capacitance. It is difficult to accurately determine this relationship, since the you are looking for the capacitance between a metal rot (the antenna) and a linear plate (hand). For our case we will approximate this relation with the formula for capacitance of two parallel plates. Secondly, the frequency also depends on the oscillator circuit. For this we use the frequency relation of a Colpitts oscillator. 

The formula for a parallel plate capacitor can be seen below:
$$
C = C_0 + \frac{\epsilon _0  A}{d}
$$

where:
- **C** = total capacitance [F]

- **C₀** = background capacitance [F]

- **ε₀** = vacuum permittivity ($8.854 \times 10^{-12} F/m$)

- **A** = plate area [m²]

- **d** = plate separation [m]



The frequency of a Colpitts oscillator can be seen in the formula below:

$$
f = \frac{1}{2\pi \sqrt{LC}}
$$

where:
- **f** = frequency of oscillator [Hz]
- **L** = inductance in oscillator [H]
- **C** = total capacitance [F] 

by combining these two formulas and you will get:

$$
f = \frac{1}{2\pi \sqrt{L (C_0 + \frac{\epsilon _0  A}{d})}}
$$

$$
f = \frac{1}{2\pi \sqrt{LC_0}} \times \frac{1}{\sqrt{1+\frac{\epsilon _0 A}{d C_0}}}
$$

$$
f = \frac{A}{\sqrt{1+\frac{B}{d}}}
$$ (eq-hand_pos_to_freq)

where:
- **f** = frequency of oscillator [Hz]
- **A** = constant related to the maximum frequency
- **B** = constant related to the relative hand-capacitance strength
- **d** = distance of the hand [m] 


If we assume that everything except distance stays constant, there are only two value's which should be optimized to find a good fit for the relation between distance and frequency. The hand distance can be found by inverting the formula above. 

To map the hand distance to the right frequencies it is important to know the science behind music. Music is composed of octaves which are made from notes. Each octave contains 12 notes and each octave is exactly twice as high as the previous octave. By representing each note as a number you can find the following relation:

$$
f = f_0 \cdot 2^{\frac{n}{12}}
$$ (eq-note_to_freq)

where:
- **f** is the output frequency [Hz]
- **f₀** is the lowest frequency of the theremin [Hz]
- **n** is the note that is being played.

This formula can be used to transform a linear range of notes to correct sounding musical frequencies. 

The table below shows the "correct" frequencies for each musical notes.

```{figure} figures/notes_to_freq.webp
:name: notes_to_freq
:width: 60%


The frequencies of each note (rows) in each octave (columns).
```

###  Least square regression
A least squares regression line represents the relationship between variables in a scatter plot. The line is of the form y = ax +b. The point of a least square line is to minimize the total error between the line and the data points. The residual can be calculated by summing the square of the individuals errors. This is called the sum of squared errors (SSE).


$$
\text{SSE} = \sum_{i=1}^{n} \left(y_i - (a x_i + b)\right)^2
$$


The SSE can be minimized by equating the derivative of the SSE to zero. 
Doing that will result in the following values for a and b:

$$
a =
\frac{
n\sum x_i y_i
-
(\sum x_i)(\sum y_i)
}{
n\sum x_i^2
-
(\sum x_i)^2
}
$$ (eq-LS1)

and

$$
b
=
\left(\frac{\sum_{}{} y_i}{n}\right)
-
a\left(\frac{\sum_{}^{} x_i}{n}\right)
$$ (eq-LS2)


where:
- **n** is number of samples.
- **x_i** is the x position of sample i.
- **y_i** is the y position of sample i.

*Source: {cite}`linear_regression`*

## Method  
A nassi schneiderman diagram of the code can be seen in the Figure below ({numref}`nassi-schneiderman`). In the setup face, the ESP32 starts with initializing the pulse counter and the input control. Then it will calibrate the system. In the loop face the ESP3 will continuously measure the input pulses, calculate the right output frequency, measure the amplitude and measure the wave form. The last step is to send all this data to the microprocessor using a UART connection.  

```{figure} figures/nassi_schneiderman_diagram.png
:name: nassi-schneiderman
:width: 40%

A nassi schneidermann diagram of the code on the ESP32.
```

### Frequency measurement
The frequency measurements are performed using the ESP32's built-in pulse counter (PCNT) and timer. Every 20 ms, the timer expires and executes a callback function. This callback reads the pulse counter value and stops the counting process. After the measurement has been processed, the pulse counter is cleared and the timer is restarted to begin a new measurement. A physical wire between pin 32 and pin 35 is used to stop and enable the pulse counter.

The pulse counter unit uses a 16 bit signed register {cite}`datasheet_esp32`. This means that the largest number it can represent is +32767. When it reaches this number the counter resets. This is unwanted, therefore we give an interrupt at 25 000 pulses and then reset the counter. We can count the number of overflows and use that to keep track of the actual pulse count. This allows us to keep track of way higher numbers than the initial 16 bit register. 

The code that was used is based on the code for a precession frequency meter ({cite}`pulse_counter`).
 
### Calibration
The capacitance of the antenna depends not only on the user's hand, but also on the surroundings. It is therefore essential to first calibrate the antenna. This is done by holding you hand consecutively on 5 cm, 10 cm, 20 cm and 30 cm and pressing a button each time. The frequency of the oscillator is recorded whenever a button is pressed. When the calibration process has finished, you have 4 different datapoints. 

The code will try to fit a curve through the points which will map the frequency to the position of the user's hand. The relation between the distance of the user's hand and the oscillator frequency is explained in the theory section (equation: {eq}`eq-hand_pos_to_freq`). The goal of the calibration function is to find the value for A and B. This can be done by rewriting the formula and than using least squared regression.

Rewriting this equation yields:
$$
f = \frac{A}{\sqrt{1+\frac{B}{d}}}
$$

$$
\frac{1}{f^2} = \frac{1+\frac{B}{d}}{A^2}
$$

$$
\frac{1}{f^2} = \frac{1}{A^2} + \frac{B}{A^2} \frac{1}{d}
$$

By substituting Y for $1/f^2$ and X for $1/d$ you get a linear relationship between the two variables.

Curve fitting a linear equation through a number of data points can be done using a least squared regression fit described by equation {eq}`eq-LS1` and {eq}`eq-LS2`.

By combining these two formulas, the values for A and B can be found. By inverting equation {eq}`eq-hand_pos_to_freq` you can now easily find the hand position of the user based on the input frequency. 

In order to give the correct frequency output the hand position should first be normalized. This is simply done by dividing it by the maximum hand distance of 30 cm. You can than multiply it by the amount of notes you want to play. This way you converted the hand position to a muscial note. To output the right frequency you use the relation between notes and frequency which was described by equation {eq}`eq-note_to_freq`.

### AutoTune
The autoTune functionality is connected to a switch. When the switch is turned on this function should automatically adjust the pitch of the audio. It will make the theremin easier to play by correcting off-key notes. The autoTune uses the inverse of equation {eq}`eq-note_to_freq` to convert the frequency of the audio to notes. The note will probably not be an exact note, but will likely contain a little offset. The autoTune function will round the note to whole numbers. This will correct the offset. Equation {eq}`eq-note_to_freq` is then used to convert the perfect note back into playable frequencies. 

### Amplitude slider
The amplitude of the audio can be manipulated using a potentiometer. The potentiometer is connected to an analogue pin of the ESP32. The ESP32 uses 12 bit ADC's, this means that the amplitude selection has a range of 4096. The input voltage gets converted to an integer between 0 and 4096. This number gets directly send to the microprocessor using the UART connection. 

### Waveform selection
The waveform can be selected using a 3-way rotary switch. This switch is connected to the ESP using 2 digital pins. When none of the pins is selected a sine wave is produced, when the left pin is selected a traingle wave is made and when the right pin is selected a square wave is made. The data of the rotary switch is transmitted by sending a 0,1 or 2 via the UART connection. 


### Pin layout
The layout for all the connected in/output pins can be seen in the table below ({numref}`pin_layout`).


```{table} The pin layout of the microcontroller in the theremin
:name: pin_layout
| Subsystem | ESP32 Pin(s) | Purpose |
|:---------:|:------------:|:--------|
| Pulse Counter | GPIO 34 | oscillator frequency input |
| Pulse Counter | GPIO 32 ↔ GPIO 35 | Internal pulse-count connection |
| UART | GPIO 17 | TX (Transmit) |
| UART | GPIO 16 | RX (Receive) |
| Controls | GPIO 5 | Calibration button |
| Controls | GPIO 4 | Amplitude slider |
| Controls | GPIO 22, GPIO 23 | Rotary switch waveform selection |
| Controls | GPIO 12 | AutoTune switch |
```


## Results

### Frequency measurement
The accuracy of the frequency measurement is found by connecting the system to a function generator. The function generator will mimic the antenna by generating a known frequency. The error between the function generator and the pulse counter is calculated. The results are shown in the table below.

```{table} Frequency measurements of the pulse counter module
:name: freq measurements
:width: 40%
| Input frequency [Hz] | Measured frequency [Hz] | Error [Hz] |
|:-------------------:|:----------------------:|:----------:|
| 500,000 | 499,696 | -304 |
| 550,000 | 549,663 | -337 |
| 600,000 | 599,630 | -370 |
| 650,000 | 649,608 | -392 |
| 700,000 | 699,575 | -425 |
| 750,000 | 749,545 | -455 |
| 800,000 | 799,515 | -485 |
| 850,000 | 849,482 | -518 |
| 900,000 | 899,450 | -550 |
| 950,000 | 949,420 | -580 |
| 1,000,000 | 999,387 | -613 |
```
The pulse counter operates with a measurement interval of 20 ms. Consequently, a single measurement has a frequency resolution of 1/0.02 = 50 Hz. To improve the resolution, the software averages 20 samples. This results in an effective resolution of 1 Hz.

Resetting the timer and averaging takes approximately 0.080 ms. 

### Calibration
The calibration uses 4 different hand positions. It will take the user approximately 10 seconds to calibrate the system. 

The accuracy of the calibration was tested using 2 different environments. The results can be seen in {numref}`curve_fit2` and {numref}`curve_fit3`. The value for A, B and the sum of squared errors is shown in {numref}`tab-curvefit`
```{table} The values for A, B and SSE in two different environments
:name: tab-curvefit
:width: 40%

|  | constant A | constant B | Sum of Squaref Errors (SSE)|
|:-------------------:|:----------------------:|:----------:|:----------:|
| environment 1 | 631,785| 0.011032 | 44,904,331 |
| environment 2 | 636,564 | 0.025557 | 110,825,576 | 


```


```{figure} figures/curve_fit2.png
:name: curve_fit2
:width: 70%

The curve fit and the data points of the first environment
```




```{figure} figures/curve_fit3.png
:name: curve_fit3
:width: 70%

The curve fit and the data points of the second environment
```

The delay of the entire calibration in the loop is approximately 0.140 ms. this includes the conversion from input frequency to hand position and the conversion from hand position to output frequency. 


### Input Control
The autoTune switch, calibration button, amplitude slider and waveform switch can all be selected without any false negatives of false positives. During the test period all these inputs worked 100 percent of the time.

The average delay per sub module can be seen in the table below.

```{table} The average delays per sub module in the loop.
:name: tab-delay
:width: 40%

|   sub module             | delay [ms] |
|:-------------------:|:----------------------:|
| frequency counter | 20.080|
| Calibration | 0.140 | 
| AutoTune | 0.202 |
| Amplitude select | 0.405 |
| Waveform select | 0.021 |
| UART | 0.211 |
| Total | 21.248 |

```
## Discussion 

The frequency counter has an effective resolution of 1 Hz. This is a great resolution, since each pulse only lasts for a couple microseconds. However the frequency counter also has a small offset. This offset grows linearly with frequency. At 1 MHz the offset is -613 Hz. The offset is  613 Hz * 0.02 s = 12.26 pulses. Each pulse is only 1 microsecond long. That means that the timer probably lasts 12.26 microseconds shorter. The pulse counter is read after 19.98774 ms instead of the 20 ms we anticipated. Fortunately, the offset isn't a big deal, because we calibrate the system. This ensures that the exact values don't matter and only the difference between those values matters. 

As you can see in {numref}`curve_fit2` and {numref}`curve_fit3`, the curve fit is not perfect. There is a relatively big gap between the fitted curve and the datapoints for both Figures. This is partly explained by electric noise influencing the capacitance of the antenna and thereby the frequency of the oscillator. 
Even when the user's hand was at the same position, the frequency of the oscillator changed with a couple of kilo Hertz. This made it difficult to play the exact same tone. 

The distance-frequency relation ({numref}`eq-hand_pos_to_freq`) that was used for the curve fit also uses some questionable approximations, which could also explain the difference between the datapoints and the fitted line. 
It firstly approximates the antenna-hand capacitance as a parallel plate capacitor. This is not a very good approximation since the antenna is round. The real capacitance will probably be described by a difficult formula which uses both the formula for parallel plate capacitor and the formula for a (partly) cylindrical capacitor. 
Secondly the parallel plate formula that was used does not take fringing effects into account. It therefore only holds when the distance between the plates is smaller than the surface of the plates. When you hold your hand far away from the antenna, this relation breaks down. To better describe the relation you will have to use a formula which also uses the additional capacitances due to the fringing effects. 

## conclusion
