# Discussions & Conclusion
## Discussions
### Sensing
The sensing module did not give the expected results. The frequency is a lot lower then the expectations that were made based on theory. The expected lowest frequency was found to be $385kHz$, while it was expected to be $920kHz$. The oscillator itself works as expected, but as soon as the antenna is connected it behaves in an unexpected, but not unpredictable way. This is likely due to external factors such as cheap components or parasitic capacitances. The signal conditioning module is able to amplify the signal in a way that it conserves it frequency content, but is readable by the signal processing module.


### Visualisation
 The visualisation has too much delay. In the future, this delay could be brought down by making the code more efficient. The visualisation forms add educational value to the concepts in the NLT module according to the [pedagogue/teacher](app-interview).
 Also, in the future, a touchscreen display could be used in combination with a GUI. 

### Support Systems
The audio output has a speaker that performs worse with low frequencies. The lowest playable frequency falls in that range. This can be mitigated by filtering the waveform based on frequency. 
The inputs could not be implemented on time due to shipping constraints. Therefore, the intuitively of the system cannot be tested. 
The system also still needs a way to detach the antenna. This could be implemented by threading the antenna of making in foldable.
Lastly, the screen should be on the housing for the final version.


### Microcontroller
The Microcontroller can read the Amplitude and waveform select as expected. When measuring the input frequency a small error occurs. This is probably due to the timer that is used not being exactly 20 ms. The frequency is a couple of hundred hertz off, which can be explained by a timer difference of approximately  12 microseconds. 

The mapping the input frequency to a correct output frequency resulted in larger errors. The formula used to curve fit the data points is based on a number of rough approximations that do not accurately represent the exact behavior of the system.


### Microprosessor

### Implementation

The implementation shows that the communication between the sensing module and the signal processing module has mixed results. While the signal processing module is able to readout the frequency of the oscillator itself, as soon as the antenna is connected, the signal becomes unstable in readout. While calibration removes a part of this problem, there are still noticeable changes in frequency in a calibrated, static environment. 

The frequency readout by the microcontroller is successfully mapped to an audible frequency. This audible frequency range spans 4 octaves. The microcontroller module reads the selected waveform from the selection button and communicates this, together with the frequency and the amplitude to the microprocessor module.

The microcontroller successfully receives all the data sent by the microcontroller and consequently successfully generates the actual sound wave. This generated frequency is also mapped to a position on an LED array which functions as a playing guide.

The generated wave is fed through a power amplifier and sent into a speaker. This speaker outputs the sound at an audible level for all generated frequencies, while remaining within the limitation set by the [programme of requirements](02.ProgramofRequirements.md). 

The generated sound wave is sent to the visualisation module which is able to accurately show the signal's waveform and the FFT. There is however a noticeable delay between the sound and the visualisation. This could be fixed by optimizing the code, but the current implementation already serves its main educative purpose. 






## Future Work
In the future the prototype could be improved on some of its fundamental functions. The antenna is a large issue for the sculpture. The instability provided damages the educational possibilities, so a replacement of the way the antenna functions can drastically improve the overall result.

Another problem is the delay in the visualisation module. Future work could improve on this part by looking at an alternative way to implement this. This could be done by choosing a faster microprocessor or a faster algorithm. 




## Conclusion
### Sensing
The sensing module is able to successfully generate a signal which frequency is dependant on the players hand position. This frequency is able to be read out by the signal processing module.

### Visualisation
The visualisations of the waveform, fourier transform with waterfall spectrogram and notes have been successfully created.

### Support Systems
The total system proves its potential. Some minor tests and tweaks have to be made before the system can fully rollout.

### Microcontroller
The microcontroller can reliable measure the frequency of the input signal with an error of less then 0.1 percent. The amplitude and waveform are also correctly measured. The frequency, amplitude and waveform can correctly be send to the microprocessor using a UART connection. 

Converting the frequency to a correct output frequency proved to be more challenging. Because of the difficult relation between frequency and hand position, the error between the datapoints and the curve fitted line was quite large. 


### Microprosessor



### Implementation
The final implementation of the system is able to complete most requirements but fails to complete some. Some of these requirements were unable to be evaluated due to time constraints, lack of the right tools or other factors.
Some requirements that were not met are:
- **The device must enable students to observe and manipulate clearly distinguishable frequencies across at least 4 octaves.**
This was not fully met since due to the unstable behavior of the antenna the student can not precisely manipulate the frequency of the signal.

- **Input-to-sound latency must be < 30 ms (feels instantaneous)**
The latency in the software is a little too high to create a latency this low, this can be optimized but might still be too high.

- **Students should become curious about the concepts of the learning module through the device’s interaction.**
This was not able to be tested due to final product not being finished in time to get evaluate the reaction from students.

- **Must be explainable by a teacher in ≤ 5 minutes after reading a manual.**
This was also not able to be tested with the same reasoning as the previous requirement, but the expectation was that this requirement is met.

- **Students should be able to grasp the concepts at a level of abstraction that fits within the existing learning module**
The concepts discussed are closely related to the learning module, but the student's experience could not be tested.

- **Each control should have a visual or physical label.**
This could not be implemented due to time constraints and issues with component availability which delayed the final version drastically

- **The device should not be larger than 40 × 30 × 20 cm.**
The antenna is a little too long, this was done to allow for more room for the players hand so this requirement was not met.

- **The device must withstand minor drops from a height of 50 cm**
This was not tested due to the risk of losing the progress and not having enough time to rebuild parts of the system.

- **A student must be able to explain pitch vs. loudness after using the device.**
This was also not tested due to the same reasons as mentioned before. The expectation is that they will be able to explain the difference.

- **A teacher must be able to integrate the device into a lesson without extra preparation.**
This was not able to be tested since the prototype was not used in a lesson

- **The device must survive a full classroom session without failure**
Same reason as the previous requirement.

Most of these requirements would have been able to be met if not for the time constraints. The prototype needed more time to be used in an educational environment to get a better estimation of how it meets the program of requirements.

To conclude, the overall implementation was a success. Almost every submodule functioned as it was required to do, and the connections between the modules were successful as well. The current system is a function proof of concept but shows that some parts could see minor improvements for a better final product.