# Micro Processor Subsystem

## Theory

As a result of the required functionalities of the microprocessor and the choice of the Raspberry Pi 4B (RPi), the more specific theory can be explored. The exploration of the features of the RPi lends the ability to achieve the functionalities. 

### Software
To run the required software some installations are needed.

#### Operating System
First of all, a Raspberry Pi runs an operating system (OS). This OS allows for controll of all systems on the RPi. On purchase the RPi requires an SD card with a flash of the latest version of [Raspberry Pi OS](https://www.raspberrypi.com/software/operating-systems/). From there the RPi can be accessed by its HDMI and USB ports and powered using a USB C.

#### Installing Dependencies
With access to the RPi shell, all dependencies and files can be installed. Using the following bash commands, the `<library name>` can be installed.

Always making sure to have the latest software.
```bash
sudo apt upgrade
```

Installing C/C++ libraries
```bash
sudo apt install <library name>
```

Installing python libraries
```bash
sudo apt install python3-<library name>
```

A list of dependencies for this project is listed in []().

#### Automatic Execution
For the purpose of this project, a plug and play implementation is required. As the RPi is usually operated using a keyboard, mouse and screen this is not the default case for programs that are on the RPi. The RPi can execute programs at boot and at login. At boot the program has access to all systems on the board itself, including the audio system, GPIO pins and internal hardwired ip addresses. At login the systems that are connected to the RPi become available, including a display. The method to run files at boot is listed in detail [here](https://www.thedigitalpictureframe.com/ultimate-guide-systemd-autostart-scripts-raspberry-pi/).

### Communication UART
To communicate between devices a Universal Asynchronous Receive Transmit protocol is used. This protocol is integrated in both the micro controller and processor. The UART protocol communicates characters at a certain Baud rate, which needs to be the same at both devices, the timing, however does not need to be synced, as the bits are handled FIFO. The most important feature is that the data sent is in the form of ASCII characters, which consist of only 1 byte. This means characters such as `\n` can be used as seperators. On the receiving end, these characters can be detected, as well as `int`, `float` or other datatypes can be extracted from read strings using `sscanf("%d",&i)`.

For the RPi, no extra library needs to be installed to be able to access the serial port. `termios` and `fcntl` are pre installed libraries, which access the serial port and can initialise the port with certain settings such as Baud rate, input/output mode. The following scheme is schetched in the [wiki on Termios:](https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Serial_Programming/termios) @noauthor_serial_nodate

1. Open serial device.

1. Configure communication parameters.

1. Use standard Unix system calls read and write.

1. Close serial device.

The device name of the UART ports on the GPIO pins is `"/dev/ttyS0"`.

The communication parameters: `options.c_cflag`, `options.c_lflag`, `options.c_oflag` and `options.c_iflag`, or control, local, output and input flags. These parameters can be altered for the desired communication form. For simplicity a common implementation is best, where the Baud rate is 115200, readmode is activated and forcing 8-bit mode for ASCII character transmission. The opening and configuration of the serial port is shown in the code block below.

```c++
void set_interface_attribs(void)
{
    //Open uart
    uart0_filestream = open("/dev/ttyS0", O_RDWR | O_NOCTTY);		//Open in non blocking read/write mode
    if (uart0_filestream == -1) {
        //ERROR - CAN'T OPEN SERIAL PORT
        printf("Error: Unable to open UART\n");
    }

    //Configure uart
    
    tcgetattr(uart0_filestream, &options);

    cfsetispeed(&options, B115200);
    cfsetospeed(&options, B115200);

    options.c_cflag |= (CLOCAL | CREAD);
    options.c_cflag &= ~PARENB;
    options.c_cflag &= ~CSTOPB;
    options.c_cflag &= ~CSIZE;
    options.c_cflag |= CS8;

    options.c_lflag = 0;
    options.c_oflag = 0;
    options.c_iflag = IGNPAR;

    options.c_cc[VMIN]  = 1;
    options.c_cc[VTIME] = 1;

    tcsetattr(uart0_filestream, TCSANOW, &options);
}
```

### Sample Generation & Waveform Manipulation
To generate audio of a certain form 

### Audio Output
For accessing the audio card of the RPi in C/C++, the ALSA sound library API is used. This can access the output devices and send samples from the 3.5mm jack. @noauthor_alsa_nodate To use the alsa library the API should be installed.
```bash
sudo apt install alsa-utils libasound2-dev alsa-tools
```
For compilation and building your C/C++ files, append the -lasound to your compile and build commands.

The API requires the definition of some parameters. These parameters include the format, access, number of channels, sample rate, soft_resample and latency. The latency determines how much latency is allowed for samples to be sent, otherwise the software underruns. An implementation of initialising the audio card and setting the parameters is given below.

```c++
// Audio
int err;
snd_pcm_t *handle;
// Open and configure the playback device
err = snd_pcm_open(&handle, "hw:CARD=Headphones", SND_PCM_STREAM_PLAYBACK, 0);
if (err < 0) {
    fprintf(stderr, "Playback open error: %s\n", snd_strerror(err));
    return EXIT_FAILURE;
}

err = snd_pcm_set_params(handle,
                            SND_PCM_FORMAT_S16_LE,
                            SND_PCM_ACCESS_RW_INTERLEAVED,
                            1, SAMPLE_RATE, 1, 40000);
if (err < 0) {
    fprintf(stderr, "Hardware configuration error: %s\n", snd_strerror(err));
    snd_pcm_close(handle);
    return EXIT_FAILURE;
}
```

Frames can then be sent using the following `C++` code.
```c++
// Send frames to ALSA pipeline
snd_pcm_sframes_t frames = snd_pcm_writei(handle, buffer, BUFFER_SIZE);
if (frames < 0) {
    frames = snd_pcm_recover(handle, frames, 0);
}
if (frames < 0) {
    fprintf(stderr, "snd_pcm_writei failed: %s\n", snd_strerror(frames));
    break;
}
```

#### Sample Rate

According to the subsystem requirements, the base tones of the audio that is to be generated reach to approximately 3000Hz. According to the Nyquist condition ($f_s\geq 2B$), sampling should be done at at least twice this frequency. However, keeping in mind the sine, block and triangle forms, only the block waveform can be reliably and recognisably generated. Additionaly, for modularity for future improvements, different audio waveforms may be used, such as, more complex instrument recordings. For this reason it was chosen to look at sampling rates common in audio systems. Due to the audible hearing limit lying at 20kHz, a sampling frequency of at least 40kHz is needed, inlcuding a margin to omit sampling only nodes. This is the reason many audio signals are sampled at 44.1kHz (CDs for example). Currently higher sampling rates are used as well, below in [](#tab-sound) the different purposes for different sampling rates in audio are layed out. @noauthor_audio_2024

:::{table}
:label: tab-sound
:align: center
| Sample rate   | Use case  |
| :---          | :---      |
| 44.1kHz       | Standard for music CDs |
| 48kHz         | Standard for audio in film and video |
| 96kHz and 192kHz | High quality audio production |

Different sampling rate use cases in digital audio processing.
:::
The ALSA library has a default setting of 48kHz and will resample audio of a different rate. @noauthor_alsa_nodate In the end, it is chosen to keep the sampling rate at 48kHz, so that no extra configuration is needed and more complex audio fragments can be used in future implementations.

### GPIO Control

### Communication Visualisation